
An abdominal cavity abscess associated with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium phage type DT2 in a dog: a case report


L Cakir Bayram 
F Aydin 

Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Erciyes University
KayseriTurkey


Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Department of Microbiology
Latife Cakir Bayram
Erciyes University
38039KayseriTurkey

An abdominal cavity abscess associated with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium phage type DT2 in a dog: a case report
D4D50E8F74899A32AF73A9CF6F03BB2510.17221/8883-VETMEDReceived: 2015-03-02 Accepted after corrections: 2016-03-10abdominal abscessdogSalmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium variant DT2minimum inhibitory concentrationresistance profile
Most Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium strains are capable of infecting multiple hosts.In this report, an abdominal cavity abscess associated with the Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium phage type DT2 is described in a dog.A dead male dog was admitted to the Department of Pathology at the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine at Erciyes University for necropsy.Anorexia, weight loss and lethargy were the clinical symptoms that were reported by the owner of the dog.The diagnosis was made by histopathological and bacteriological examinations of the lungs, spleen, liver and heart.In addition, the content of the abdominal cavity mass was evaluated in bacteriological analysis.The serotyping, phage typing and antibiotic susceptibility of the isolated bacteria were performed at the Danish Institute for Food and Veterinary Research.To the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the first study reporting an abscess associated with S. enterica serovar Typhimurium phage type DT2 in a dog.

The host range of S. enterica subsp.enterica serotype Typhimurium (S.Typhimurium) is extremely broad and includes humans, ruminants, domestic fowl, rodents and birds.However, some serotype Typhimurium variants have an only very narrow host range whereas other species may transmit infections to multiple hosts (Baumler et al. 1998;Rabsch et al. 2002).Although the majority of S. Typhimurium strains affect several animal species, the phage types (DT) 2 and 99 of Salmonella Typhimurium have been associated with systemic diseases particularly in pigeons (Pasmans et al. 2003;Helm et al. 2004).Serotype Typhimurium can be differentiated into numerous distinct variants by phage typing and other epidemiological typing methods (Pang et al. 2013).There are several studies reporting the isolation of medically important serotypes for humans such as S. Typhimurium, Corvallis, Dusseldorf, Enteritidis and others in domestic dogs around the world (Kocabiyik et al. 2006;Tsai et al. 2007;Hoelzer et al. 2011).Salmonella infections in dogs are generally clinically asymptomatic; infections in the gastrointestinal tract may manifest as enterocolitis and endotoxaemia, the common symptoms of which are fever, vomiting, anorexia, dehydration and depression (Hoelzer et al. 2011).The formation of abscesses due to Salmonella infections was attributed to Salmonella serotypes in several cases in humans (Su et al. 2003;Lin et al. 2006;Singh et al. 2011).In addition, Salmonella serotypes, which cause soft tissue abscesses in guinea pigs, hamsters (Iijima et al. 1987), horses (Blikslager et al. 1991), columbiform birds (doves and pigeons) (Pasmans et al. 2003) and a grey collie (Moazed et al. 1990), have been previously reported.Clinical symptoms such as systemic arthritis and osteomyelitis in horses (Platt 1973), and enteritis, metritis and abortion in rabbits (Agnoletti et al. 2010), have been observed in outbreaks associated with Salmonella Typhimurium serotypes.

Pigeon Salmonella enterica subsp.enterica serovar Typhimurium variant Copenhagen is recognised to be a host-adapted strain (Rabsch 2002;Pasmans et al. 2003).Host-adapted Salmonella isolates are extremely lethal for pigeons (Uzzau et al. 2000;Pasmans et al. 2003).

The most striking examples of this apparent adaptation to one particular host reservoir are the serotype Typhimurium phage types DT2 and DT99 which have been cultured from pigeons (Rabsch et al. 2002).It has been demonstrated that pigeon isolates of serotype Typhimurium are different from the ribotypes and biotypes of isolates from people or other animals, and do not represent a source of infection for other hosts (Scholtens and Caroli 1971).

Thus, the Typhimurium serotype prevailing in pigeons (pigeon type) is rarely transmitted to other hosts (Wuthe et al. 1975;Van Oye and Borghijs 1979;Brandis et al. 1980;Rabsch et al. 2002).Epidemiological evidence has shown that serotype Typhimurium has a specific phage type and a narrow host range; it is usually isolated from a specific host, and is rarely isolated from other mammals and birds (Rabsch et al. 2002).These strains cause gastroenteritis, arthritis, orchitis, oophoritis or granulomatous inflammation in all organs, and are likely to be a major cause of bacterial diseases with high mortality in pigeons (Faddoul and Fellows 1965).

In this case report we describe and discuss the pathological and bacteriological findings of an abdominal cavity abscess associated with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium phage type DT2 in an Anatolian Karabash dog.


Case description

A dead male dog was presented for necropsy to the Department of Pathology at the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine at Erciyes University by the humane society of Kayseri within approximately two hours after the occurrence of natural death.There was no detailed information about the dead dog and thus, no information pertaining to acute/chronic gastrointestinal tract infections or immune and nutritional status.Nevertheless, anorexia, weight loss and lethargy were observed before death.No therapeutic interventions were carried out.

Following gross examination at necropsy, samples of the lungs, spleen, liver, heart and abdominal cavity mass were collected for histopathological and bacteriological examinations.In addition, content from the abdominal mass was taken for culture.For histopathological examinations, tissue samples were fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin wax, sectioned at a thickness of 5-6 µm, mounted on glass slides and stained with haematoxylin and eosin (HE), Crossman's triple stain and Brown-Brenn Gram stains.For bacteriological examinations, all of the samples were inoculated onto blood agar (Blood Agar Base, Merck, Germany, supplemented with 7% sheep blood),  MacConkey agar (Merck, Germany) and EMB (eosin methylene blue) agar (Merck, Germany).Plates were incubated at 37 °C for 24-48 h under aerobic, microaerobic (Anaerocult C, Merck, Germany) and anaerobic (Anaerocult A, Merck, Germany) conditions.In addition, mycological examinations were performed by using Sabouraud dextrose agar (Merck, Germany) and media were incubated at 25 and 37 °C.Preliminary identification of the grown colonies was based on phenotypic characteristics such as colony morphology, microscopic morphology and biochemical tests (Quinn 2002).Serotyping and phage typing were performed according to the Kauffmann-White scheme, Salmonella phage typing and the Colindale scheme, respectively (Arguello et al. 2014).Antimicrobial susceptibility was established by determining minimal inhibitory concentration values (CLSI 2002).

Gross pathology revealed a fluctuant, lobular, greyish-pink, well-demarcated mass approximately 25 cm in size in the abdominal cavity (Figure 1).The abscess was surrounded by a thick capsule (Figure 2A).The spleen was atrophic, and there was an adhesion between the spleen and the wall of the abscess.The cut surface of the mass was lobular and greyish-white in colour with haemorrhagic foci (Figure 2B).The content of the mass was greyish-white, and exhibited a creamy consistency.No macroscopic lesions were detected in other organs at gross examination.

In histological examinations, slides stained with HE revealed a granulation tissue composed of reactive chronic inflammation cells and fibro-vascular connective tissue in the wall of the abdominal cavity mass.In some areas, a mixture of inflammatory cells was observed.Moreover, both acute and chronic inflammations were detected.The wall of the abscess consisted of ingrowths of capillaries and fibroblasts.Large cells called bizarre cells with nucleomegaly, pleomorphism, and sometimes, multinucleation, were observed in the abscess wall adjacent to the spleen (Figure 3).In some areas, extensive aggregation of foamy macrophages and many neutrophils and mononuclear cells which had infiltrated the fibrous connective tissue were observed.There was also visible congestion in the connective tissue.Gram staining revealed the presence of Gram-negative bacteria in these areas.The presence of intercellular and capsular collagens was demonstrated using Masson Trichrome staining.Unremarkable inflammatory changes were observed in several sections of the lungs, spleen, liver and heart which were stained with HE.

In bacteriological examination, greyish-white, 1-2 mm diameter, S type colonies were detected on blood agar as a pure culture when incubated under aerobic conditions.Lactose-negative colonies which were observed to grow in both MacConkey and EMB media (at least three) were also identified using phenotypic tests, which included catalase production, oxidase reaction, H 2 S production, carbohydrate fermentation and urease activity.Plates incubated under microaerobic and anaerobic conditions were found to be negative for growth.Colonies were identified as Salmonella spp.according to the phenotypic characteristics.The serotyping, phage typing and antibiotic susceptibility of this bacterium were performed at the Danish Institute for Food and Veterinary Research at the Department of Microbiological Food Safety in Denmark (Arguello et al. 2014).

The bacterium was identified by serotyping and phage typing as Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium phage type DT2.The isolate was resistant to streptomycin whereas it was sensitive to amoxicillin + clavulanic acid, ampicillin, apramycin, ceftiofur, chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, colistin, florfenicol, gentamicin, nalidixic acid, neomycin, spectinomycin, sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline and trimethoprim.


DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Salmonella strains have been reported to be hostspecific (Baumler et al. 1998;Uzzau et al. 2000) and extremely pathogenic to pigeons (Pasmans et al. 2004).The biotype and ribotype of S. Typhimurium isolates in pigeons differ greatly from human and animal isolates (Scholtens and Caroli 1971;Van Oye and Borghijs 1979).Rabsch et al. (2002) also reported that the serotype S. enterica serovar Typhimurium phage type DT2 has been commonly isolated in pigeons, and emphasised that the serotype Typhimurium, a dominant serotype in pigeons, is hardly ever transferred to other hosts, which reduces its negative impact on humans.On the other hand, environmental contamination is a crucial risk factor for the spread of infections in doves and pigeons, which may transmit diseases to humans through livestock systems (Hoelzer et al. 2011).Salmonella strains with the same genotypic features have been isolated from wild birds, cats and people, especially from babies, demonstrating the direct or indirect transfer of the pathogen to humans from wild birds.Cats which have contact with or that eat contaminated birds can play an important role as a mediator between birds and humans (Hauser et al. 2009).Pet dogs are often in close contact with their owners, including children, and they can shed salmonellae for weeks without any clinical signs (Salehi et al. 2013).

Previous studies have shown that the most predominant serotypes of salmonellae in dogs were Typhimurium, Heidelberg, Kentucky, Corvallis, Düsseldorf and Enteritidis (Kocabiyik et al. 2006;Tsai et al. 2007;Hoelzer et al. 2011).Although the majority of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium strains affect multiple hosts (Helm et al. 2004), there are no reports regarding the existence of serovar Typhimurium phage type DT2 in dogs.

Even though infections in dogs associated with salmonellae serotypes have been reported to be clinically asymptomatic, infections in the gastrointestinal tract may lead to enterocolitis and endotoxaemia.The common symptoms of these conditions include fever, vomiting, anorexia, dehydration and depression (Hoelzer et al. 2011;Cobb and Stavisky 2013).In this case, although the dog had no specific clinical symptoms, anorexia, weight loss and lethargy were observed by the owner of the dog before death (Hoelzer et al. 2011;Cobb and Stavisky 2013).However, no macroscopic lesions were detected in the gastrointestinal system at necropsy.Extraintestinal occurrence of salmonella usually happens rarely and only in immunocompromised or elderly hosts (Minohara et al. 2002).In this case, there was no information about the age, feeding behaviour or immune status of the animal.Pennycott et al. (2006), Philbey et al. (2008) and Taylor and Philbey (2010) have claimed that wild birds carry Salmonella serovar Typhimurium strains similar to those found in pets and farm animals.Several sporadic salmonellosis outbreaks thought to be associated with Salmonella infections in wild birds have been reported in pets (especially cats) (Alley et al. 2002;Refsum et al. 2002).In England, Pennycott et al. (2006) investigated the cause of death of wild birds by evaluating the postmortem findings of the carcasses.The authors have shown that Salmonella Typhimurium DT40 and DT56 in finches and sparrows, DT41 and DT195 in seagulls, and DT2 and DT99 in wild pigeons were isolated as dominant variants, and that these 'wild bird' strains were, at the same time isolated from cattle, sheep, pigs, chickens or turkeys.The results of the present study therefore support the results of Horton et al. (2013) who investigated the hypothesis concerning the association of some sporadic salmonella infections in pets with salmonella infections originating from garden birds.The evidence obtained in their study showed salmonella infection in domestic livestock to be associated with wild birds, and also supported the hypothesis that wild birds threaten public health directly or indirectly.

Serotype Typhimurium isolates that were isolated from different species were found to be more closely associated with each other compared to other salmonella serotypes.This is explained by the adaptation mechanisms of different host reservoirs.At this point, although there is no direct evidence for this hypothesis, a possible mechanism in in the development of such variants could be a phage-mediated transfer of host-specific virulence factors.Andrews-Polymenis et al. (2004) suggested that serotype Typhimurium DT2 and DT99 pigeon isolates are the best model possessing the necessary and sufficient genetic markers for disease in calves (enterocolitis) and for salmonella-induced enterocolitis in humans.The authors explained that the rare occurrence of disease caused by DT2 and DT99 in humans is possibly due to the scarcity of these serotypes in food animal reservoirs (i.e.livestock and domestic fowl) rather than the inability of these phage types to cause enterocolitis.

In previous studies, it was described that the ingestion of contaminated food is a major risk factor for salmonella infection.Further, it was reported that the consumption of carrion and faeces by dogs leads to a high risk of transmission and re-infection (Morse et al. 1976;Weese et al. 2005;Hoelzer et al. 2011) In this case, the isolation of serotype Salmonella Typhimurium phage type DT2 from the contents of an abscess formed in the abdominal cavity of a stray dog may be either due to the consumption of an infected pigeon or of wild poultry carrion contaminated with faeces in the animal shelter, as indicated in previous studies (Morse et al. 1976;Hoelzer et al. 2011).Although the serotype Typhimurium "pigeon type" is rarely transmitted to other host species (Rabsch et al. 2002), in this case, the finding of a Typhimurium serotype in the abscess of a dog may suggest that the agent should be considered in epidemiological studies in dogs.phage typing and antibiotic susceptibility testing of the isolated bacterium.

Florfenicol 4 S
4
Figure 1.Appearance of abscess in abdominal cavity.A = abscess, M = mesenterium, k = kidney, s = stomach, d = duodenum, c = caecum, arrow = pancreas


Figure 3 .
3
Figure 3.A granulation tissue.A: The granulation tissue illustrates bizarre cells, lymphocytes and plasmocyte cell infiltrations in the connective tissue.Masson trichrome; × 200.B: The granulation tissue shows accumulation of foamy macrophages.Masson trichrome; × 400.C: Low-power magnification of abscess wall exhibiting fibrovascular, haemorrhagic connective tissue and acute and chronic inflammatory cell infiltration.Masson trichrome; × 20.D: Reactive chronic inflammatory cells with multinucleated giant cells (arrows).Hematoxylin-eosin; × 400.E: Adhesion to the spleen parenchyma.Spleen (s) capsule was surrounded by connective tissue of abscess wall (arrows).MICI: Multinucleated-chronic inflammatory cells.Masson trichrome; × 200.F: Gram negative bacilli (arrows) in lumen of vessel.Gram staining; ×1000


Table 1 .
1
Susceptibility testing of Salmonella Typhimurium
Antimicrobial agentMICRPAntimicrobial agentMICRPAmoxicillin + clavulanic≤ 2SGentamicin≤ 1SAmpicillin2SNalidixic acid≤ 4SApramycin≤ 4SNeomycin≤ 2SCefpodoxime1000ISpectinomycin32SCeftiofur1SStrepromycin32RChloramphenicol4SSulphamethoxazole≤ 64SCiprofloxacin≤ 0.03STetracycline≤ 2SColistin≤ 4STrimethoprim≤ 4S
AcknowledgementWe are grateful to the Danish Institute for Food and Veterinary Research at the Department of Microbiological Food Safety for the serotyping,
Isolation of Salmonella spp., from Italian commercial rabbitries. F Agnoletti, M Lenarduzzi, A Ricci, A Marotta, 2. International Conference on Rabbit Production in Hot Climates. CIHEAM, Zaragoza. A Testik, M Baselga, 2010. 1999Cahiers Options Méditerranéennes; n. 41

An epidemic of salmonellosis caused by Salmonella Typhimurium DT160 in wild birds and humans in New Zealand. M R Alley, J H Connolly, S G Fenwick, G F Mackereth, M J Leyland, L E Rogers, M Haycock, C Nicol, Cme Reed, New Zealand Veterinary Journal. 502002

Host restriction of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium pigeon isolates does not correlate with loss of discrete genes. H L Andrews-Polymenis, W Rabsch, S Porwollik, M Mcclelland, C Rosetti, L G Adams, A J Baumler, Journal of Bacteriology. 1862004

H Arguello, G Sorensen, A Carvajal, D L Baggesen, P Rubio, K Pedersen, Danish animal production. Foodborne Pathogens and Disease. 20144Characterization of the emerging Salmonella

Evolution of host adaptation in Salmonella enterica. A J Baumler, R M Tsolis, T A Ficht, L G Adams, Infection and Immunity. 661998

Salmonella Typhimurium abscess as a postoperative complication in a horse with colic. A T Blikslager, D A Wilson, D S Taylor, K E Macfadden, J R Fischer, W H Fales, Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 1991991

H Brandis, J Posch, G Oberhoffer, L Andries, U Lehmacher, Contributions to the epidemiology of Salmonella typhimurium, analyzed according to the results of phage typing in the period between 1969-1978. 198042

Performance Standards for antimicrobial disk and dilution susceptibility tests for bacteria isolated from animals. PA, Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. 2002CLSI -Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute

Salmonella infections in dogs and cats. M A Cobb, J Stavisky, Salmonella in Domestic Animals. 2 nd ed. CABI, Oxfordshire, Wallingford. P A Barrow, U Methner, 2013

Characterisation of a phenotypic monophasic variant belonging to Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium from wild birds and its possible transmission to cats and humans. G P Faddoul, Gw ; Fellows, E Hauser, S Huhn, E Junker, M Jaber, A Schroeter, R Helmuth, W Rabsch, N Winterhoff, B Malorny, Berliner und Munchener Tierarztliche Wochenschrift. 91965. 2009Avian Diseases

Pigeon-associated strains of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium phage type DT2 have genomic rearrangements at rRNA operons. R A Helm, S Porwollik, A E Stanley, S Maloy, M Mcclelland, W Rabsch, A Eisenstark, Infection Immunity. 722004

Animal contact as a source of human non typhoidal salmonellosis. K Hoelzer, Moreno Switt, A I Wiedmann, M , 10.1186/1297-9716-42-34Veterinary Research. 42342011

Wild birds carry similar Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium strains to those found in domestic animals and livestock. R A Horton, G Wu, K Speed, S Kidd, R Davies, N G Coldham, J P Duff, Research Veterinary Science. 952013

Detection of Salmonella spp. in stray dogs in Bursa Province, Turkey: First isolation of Salmonella Corvallis from dogs. A L Kocabiyik, C Cetin, D Dedicova, Journal of Veterinary Medicine Series B. 532006

Epizootiological studies of Salmonella Typhimurium infection in guinea pigs. O T Iijima, M Saito, K Nakayama, S Kobayashi, K Matsuno, M Nakagawa, Jikken Dobutsu. 361987

Hand abscess, phlebitis, and bacteremia due to Salmonella enterica serotype Augustenborg. W J Lin, C C Wang, S N Cheng, W T Lo, C H Hung, Immunology and Infection. 392006Journal of Microbiology

A rare case of Salmonella soft-tissue abscess. Y Minohara, T Kato, M Chiba, K Doi, Y Kurihara, M Kusakado, Y Miyamoto, O Miyazaki, F Kawaguchi, Journal of Infection and Chemotherapy. 82002

Subcutaneous abscess due to Salmonella Adelaide in a grey collie with cyclic hematopoiesis. T C Moazed, B J Deeb, R F Digiacomo, Laboratory Animal Science. 401990

Canine salmonellosis: A review and report of dog to child transmission of Salmonella Enteritidis. E V Morse, M A Duncan, D A Estep, W A Riggs, B O Blackburn, American Journal of Public Health. 661976

Genomic diversity and adaptation of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium from analysis of six genomes of different phage types. S Pang, S Octavia, L Feng, B Liu, P R Reeves, R Lan, L Wang, BMC Genomics. 147182013

VETMED enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium variant Copenhagen phage type 99 is associated with enhanced macrophage cytotoxicity. F Pasmans, F Van Immerseel, M Heyndrickx, A Martel, C Godard, C Wildemauwe, R Ducatelle, F Haesebrouck, 10.17221/8883-Infection and Immunity. 712003Host adaptation of pigeon isolates of Salmonella

Assessment of virulence of pigeon isolates of Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium variant Copenhagen for humans. F Pasmans, F Van Immerseel, K Hermans, M Heyndrickx, J M Collard, R Ducatelle, F Haesebrouck, Journal of Clinical Pathology. 422004. 2000-2002

Isolation of different serovars of Salmonella enterica from wild birds in Great Britain between. T W Pennycott, A Park, H A Mather, Veterinary Record. 1582006. 1995. 2003

Isolation of avian strains of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium from cats with enteric disease in the United Kingdom. A W Philbey, H A Mather, D J Taylor, J E Coia, Veterinary Record. 1622008

Septicaemia in the foal. A review of 61 cases. H Platt, British Veterinary Journal. 1291973

P J Quinn, B K Markey, M E Carter, W J Donnelly, F C Leonard, Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Diseases. Blackwell Science. Oxford2002

W Rabsch, H L Andrews, R A Kingsley, R Prager, H Tschape, L G Adams, A J Baumler, Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium and its host-adapted variants. 200270

Molecular epidemiology of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium isolates determined by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis: comparison of isolates from avian wildlife, domestic animals, and the environment in Norway. T Refsum, E Heir, G Kapperud, T Vardund, G Holstad, Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 682002

Shepherd dogs as a common source for Salmonella enterica serovar Reading in Garmsar. T Z Salehi, M A Badouei, O Madadgar, S R Ghiasi, I A Tamai, Iran. Turkish Journal of Veterinary and Animal Sciences. 372013

Role of pigeons in the spread of salmonellosis: Incidence of different types of Salmonella Typhimurium var. Copenhagen in pigeons, man, and other animals. R T Scholtens, G Caroli, Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 371971

G Singh, M Dasgupta, V Gautam, A Behera, P Ray, Bilateral breast abscesses due to Salmonella Enterica serotype Typhi. 20113

F H Su, P T Chen, Y C Chiu, J W Chen, Salmonella retropharyngeal abscess in a child: case report and literature review. 200322

Salmonella infections in garden birds and cats in a domestic environment. D J Taylor, A W Philbey, Veterinary Record. 1672010

Salmonellae and campylobacters in household and stray dogs in northern Taiwan. H J Tsai, H C Huang, C M Lin, Y Y Lien, C H Chou, Veterinary Research Communication. 312007

Host adapted serotypes of Salmonella enterica. S Uzzau, D J Brown, T Wallis, S Rubino, G Leori, S Bernard, J Casadesu´s, D J Platt, J E Olsen, Epidemiology and Infection. 1252000

Do pigeons play a part in human infections with Salmonella Typhimurium var. Copenhagen. E Van Oye, J Borghijs, Deutsche Tierarztliche Wochenschrift. 891979

Bacteriological evaluation of commercial canine and feline raw diets. J S Weese, J Rousseau, L Arroyo, Canadian Veterinary Journal. 462005

Phage typing and biotyping of Salmonella typhimurium. H H Wuthe, H Brandis, L Andries, S Wuthe, Zentralblatt fur Bakteriologie. 2301975
