
Through Silicon Vias as Enablers for 3D Systems
9-11 April 2008

Erik Jung 
A Ostmann 
P Ramm 
J Wolf 
M Toepper 
M Wiemer 
Fraunhofer Izm 
Berlin / 
Munich / 
Chemnitz 
Through Silicon Vias as Enablers for 3D Systems
9-11 April 2008
This special session on 3D TSV´s will highlight some of the fabrication processes and used technologies to create vias from the frontside of an active circuit to its backside and potential implementation solutions to form complex systems leveraging these novel possibilities. General techniques for via formation are discussed as well as advanced integration solutions leveraging the power of 3D TSV´s.I.

INTRODUCTION

For decades, ideas to bring contacts from the highly populated frontside of electronic circuitry has been the holy grail of integration techniques. Since the early 1990´s, technical progress has enabled semiconductor engineers to continuously work towards this goal /1,2,3,4/. Processes that allowed the formation of holes through the bulk silicon, allowed to thin down the bulk substrate to minimize the overall process time, and the development of deposition processes to insulate and fill the created holes, forming electrically conductive vias are enablers for today´s 3D TSV´s.

It took until recently, to bring all these processes and the associated quality assurance to a point, where synergy really allows to define processes capable of being implemented in volume manufacturing. This paper provides an overview on established techniques for:

-thinning of wafers towards 150…5µm remaining substrate thickness -creating well defined holes through the bulk material -insulating the semiconductor material and -forming a conductive interconnect between the pads on front and backside of the device In addition, alternatives to these process sequences as well as methods to integrate such devices in a complex system are reviewed.


II. PROCESSES FOR VIA FORMATION

Generally, the concepts to route contacts from the front to the backside can be classified in two categories: a) routing of multiple contacts towards and through large via holes with thin film lines and re-routing them on the backside to their final position b) creating through-holes underneath or in the pad to be routed, insulating and filling the via c) creating through-holes in the pad to be routed, insulating and filling the via.

Concepts like a) (Figure 1 a and b) have been used to create lidding structures for MEMS and RF devices as well as CSP type of integrated systems for MEMS components /5,6/. They do not fall in the current focus of research interest of complex microelectronic circuit manufacturers, as they do not provide the required via density for modern chips, e.g. coming with sub 100µm contact pitches   As silicon wafers coming out of a fab have thicknesses ranging from 500 with 100mm wafers to 800µm for 300mm wafers, all currently available processes to create holes are hard pressed to realize fast, high quality and precise micro holes. With the advent of mainstream thinning technology, these finalized wafers are backgrinded to 150µm remaining silicon and less. Table I shows the target thickness and the suggested processes to achieve a high quality surface. For the subsequent processes, typically the range of 150…10µm is targeted, thereby allowing to use of today´s standard processes of backgrinding, etching and CMP / 1 /.

At these remaining silicon thickness, hole drilling techniques as of Table II become economical even with the  required precisions.   TABLE II  Hole Drilling Techniques Sources: /8, 9, 10/ 1 Processes may target the formation of TSV´s before or after the actual processing of the electronic circuit. Respective denominators refer to FEOL and BEOL via formation.

While the etching processes can be tailored to stop on the pad and under pad metallization layers, this is more critical with the laser. Here, before the thinning process, usually some additional µm of a compatible metal are deposited on top of the existing pads. Drilling into or even through these enables also a larger interconnect annulus.   


III. SYSTEM INTEGRATION CONCEPTS

After the described process sequence, a device with backside contacts is available. For the system integration concepts, this is just another technology in the tool box to create highly integrated complex functions. From the system aspect, both sides -front and backside-are accessible for    interconnect with other devices. TSV`s currently target mainly memory chips like FLASH and DRAM, as these have identical sizes, identical pad-arrangements and have a high wafer yield, making them ideal for a wafer-to-wafer integration (Figure 6). Figure 6: 3D Chip Stack using TSV´s (courtesy Yole)

However, system integration does not stop there. The tool boxes allow also to integrate non-identical devices (heterosystem integration) using state of the art assembly and packaging techniques.

Redistribution processes in combination with thin chips allow multiple layers of circuitry to be integrated on one chipsubstrate (Figure 7) or as a complex stack (Figure 8).   With optical systems, the combination of wafer-to-wafer integration to merge the optical function of a lens layer with the sensor chips, a hybrid integration on the connected backside allows to build extremely small and lightweight fully integrated cameras with enhanced functionality (Figure 11). In addition, hybrid integration targets directly two of the biggest issues with the concept of wafer-to-wafer interconnects: Chip size and chip yield.

As mentioned, with memory chips running at some 95% yield and identical dimensions, microprocessors, MEMS and CMOS optical sensors have a significantly lower yield (down to ~30%) and are -by nature-of different size. A wafer-towafer interconnect would require a huge sacrifice of silicon for the smaller chips and a multiple yield loss. Hybrid integration foregoes this problem by enabling the use of "known good dies".

Hybrid integration is conducted using advanced pick and place equipment and the respective interconnect processes like flip chip or thin film interconnect for chip-first approaches (e.g. shown in Figure 7). The pick&place process enables also the 


IV. CONCLUSION

3D TSV´s have come a long way since their first conception. While the general packaging advancement has still an edge w.r.t. manufacturing, it is quite obvious that future advancement in 3D TSV as well as associated integration techniques will enable integrated system densities and new products that have not been possible until now.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Figure 1 :
1Routed via concepts through KOH etched holes for a) RF (courtesy Hymite) and b) MEMS systems (courtesy Sonion MEMS) Concepts like b) & c), depicted in Figure 2 a and b are more suitable to the requirements of high density circuits, routing a couple of hundred contacts to the backside of a single chip.

Figure 2 :
2Blind TSV via with side wall copper fill (courtesy University of Arkansas), laser drilled through via with side wall fill based on laminate dielectric / 7 /

Figure 3 :
3a) KOH etched silicon @ 54.7°; b) DRIE etched via (courtesy of ALCATEL); c) Laser Drilled Vias (courtesy of XSIL)Silicon as semiconductor material requires an insulative cover of the hole´s sidewalls. For this, low temperature PECVD oxide deposition or organic insulators like PI or BCB are used. Finally, CVD (tungsten) or electro(less) deposition of copper is used to fill the vias(Figure 4 a and b).

Figure 4 :
4Solid filled vias a)W-CVD (courtesy IZM), b) Cu-ED (courtesy NEXX)A variation of this filling is just to cover the sidewalls and use a high step coverage process to route thus created contacts to the final pads /11 /(Figure 5).

Figure 5 :
5Thin film via contact (courtesy SCHOTT)

Figure 3b
3b

Figure 7 :
7Thin chip integration on chip

Figure 8 :
8Top/bottom routed set of chips for 3D complex system integration (courtesy iNEMI, IZM) /12/ Optical systems have been demonstrated to benefit from 3D TSV´s(Figure 9andFigure 10) /13/ similar like MEMS devices (e.g. for mirror devices).

Figure 9 :Figure 10 :
9103D TSV used for a camera chip in CSP format (courtesy SCHOTT) True wafer level CSP opto package (courtesy SCHOTT)

Figure 11 :
11Hybrid integration of additional circuitry on the backside of a TSV enabled camera system MEMS integrated systems can benefit from short signal paths and ultrasmall integration /14/.

TABLE I -
IProcesses for Wafer Thinning
The authors would like to thank the collaborators from SCHOTT, EMC-3D (www.emc3d.org) and iNEMI (www.inemi.org) for the support and images supplied
3D packaging technology overview and mass memory applications. R Terrill, Aerospace Applications Conference. 2R. Terrill, "3D packaging technology overview and mass memory applications", Aerospace Applications Conference, 1996. Proceedings., 1996 IEEE Volume 2, Issue , 3-10 Feb 1996

. Page, sPage(s):347 -355

Vertically integrated circuits. A key technology for future high performance systems. M Engelhardt, CIP '97. 11th International Colloquium on Plasma Processes. Proceedings Paris. 187M. Engelhardt et al., "Vertically integrated circuits. A key technology for future high performance systems", CIP '97. 11th International Colloquium on Plasma Processes. Proceedings Paris, 1997, pp.187

3D wafer stack neurocomputing. M L Campbell, Proceedings., Fifth Annual IEEE International Conference on Wafer Scale Integration. Fifth Annual IEEE International Conference on Wafer Scale IntegrationM.L. Campbell et al., "3D wafer stack neurocomputing", Proceedings., Fifth Annual IEEE International Conference on Wafer Scale Integration, 1993, pp. 67 -74

Interchip via technology-three dimensional metallization for vertically integrated circuits. E Bertagnolli, Fourth International Symposium on Semiconductor Wafer Bonding 1997. Proceedings. E. Bertagnolli et al., "Interchip via technology-three dimensional metallization for vertically integrated circuits", Fourth International Symposium on Semiconductor Wafer Bonding 1997. Proceedings, pp.509-520

The first low voltage, low noise differential silicon microphone, technology development and measurement results. P Rombach, Sensors and Actuators A. 95P. Rombach et al,. "The first low voltage, low noise differential silicon microphone, technology development and measurement results", Sensors and Actuators A, Volume 95, Issues 2-3, 1 January 2002, Pages 196-201

Ultra-thin Silicon µ-via Substrates and Integrated µvias for SiP Applications. A Hase, Second internat. Workshop on SIP, SOP, SOC. AtlantaA. Hase et al., "Ultra-thin Silicon µ-via Substrates and Integrated µ- vias for SiP Applications", Second internat. Workshop on SIP, SOP, SOC, Sept., 22-25. 2005, Atlanta

Development of a 3D Wafer Level Re-Routing using dielectric lamination technology. L Boettcher, Proc. SMTA. SMTARosemontL. Boettcher et al., "Development of a 3D Wafer Level Re-Routing using dielectric lamination technology", Proc. SMTA 2006, Rosemont

Online process documentation. Online process documentation: http://www.virginiasemi.com /pdf/siliconetchingandcleaning.doc

. Press, Sts, PEGASUSPress release of STS: http://www.stsystems.com/, PEGASUS

High Speed Via Drilling for 3D Interconnect Industrialization", as contribution given during "3D Integration, Technologies and Strategies. J L Laydevant, Encasit workshop. MunichJ.L.Laydevant, "High Speed Via Drilling for 3D Interconnect Industrialization", as contribution given during "3D Integration, Technologies and Strategies", Encasit workshop, May. 11th 2006, Munich

New wafer-level-packaging technology using siliconvia-contacts for optical and other sensor applications. J Leib, Electronic Components and Technology Conference. 1J. Leib et al., "New wafer-level-packaging technology using silicon- via-contacts for optical and other sensor applications", Electronic Components and Technology Conference, 2004. Proceedings. 54th, Volume 1, Issue , 1-4 June 2004 Page(s): 843 -847 Vol.1

iNEMI Packaging Roadmap: The impact of miniaturization. J Wolf, B Bottoms, Productronica; MunichAdvanced Manufacturing Technology SeminarJ.Wolf, B. Bottoms, "iNEMI Packaging Roadmap: The impact of miniaturization", Advanced Manufacturing Technology Seminar, Productronica 2007, Nov. 14th, Munich

Packaging Technology for Imager Using Throughhole Interconnections in Si Substrate. S Hirafune, 6th IEEE CPMT Conference on High Density Microsystem Design and Packaging (HDP'04). Shanghai, ChinaS. Hirafune et al., "Packaging Technology for Imager Using Through- hole Interconnections in Si Substrate", 6th IEEE CPMT Conference on High Density Microsystem Design and Packaging (HDP'04), June 30 -July 3, 2004, Shanghai, China

High Density Through Wafer Via Technology. T Bauer, 31420061844T. Bauer, "High Density Through Wafer Via Technology", NSTI- Nanotech 2007,Vol. 3, ISBN 1420061844
