
WP/21/254 Safe Asset Demand, Global Capital Flows and Wealth Concentration IMF Working Paper Research Department Safe Asset Demand, Global Capital Flows and Wealth Concentration


Taehoon Kim 
WP/21/254 Safe Asset Demand, Global Capital Flows and Wealth Concentration IMF Working Paper Research Department Safe Asset Demand, Global Capital Flows and Wealth Concentration
Prepared by Taehoon Kim Authorized for distribution by Deniz Igan October 2021IMF Working Papers describe research in progress by the author(s) and are published to elicit comments and to encourage debate. The views expressed in IMF Working Papers are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF, its Executive Board, or IMF management. WP/21/254Global capital flowsFinancial integrationSafe assetWealth inequality Authors' E-Mail Addresses: tkim@imforg
The US economy is often referred to as the "banker to the world," due to its unique role in supplying global reserve assets and funding foreign risky investment. This paper develops a general equilibrium model to analyze and quantify the contribution of th is role to rising wealth concentration among American households. I highlight the following points: 1) financial globalization raises wealth inequality in a financially-developed economy initially due to foreign capital pressing up domestic asset prices; 2) much of this increase is transitory and can be reversed as future expected returns on domestic assets fall; and 3) despite the low-interest-rate environment, newly accessed foreign capital provides incentives for affluent households to reallocate wealth toward risky assets while impoverished households increase their debt. Wealth concentration ensues only if this rebalancing effect is large enough to counteract diminished return on domestic assets. Quantitative analysis suggests that global financial integration alone can account for a third to a half of the observed increase in the current top one percent wealth share in the US, but indicates a possible reversal in the future. JEL Classification Numbers: F36, F41, E21, E44

1 Introduction 1 e United States is o en referred to as the "banker to the world, " due to its unique role in supplying global reserve assets and funding foreign risky investment (Kindleberger 1965, Gourinchas andRey 2007). e rapid advancement of nancial globalization in recent decades has allowed US economic entities to seek funding from foreign investors, created new investment opportunities, and changed the market value of domestic assets owned by American households. However, despite the US being the centerpiece of global nancial architecture, li le research has studied the e ect of capital ows on the domestic household wealth distribution. is paper takes a rst stab at the mechanism. Using new methods for modeling heterogeneous agent economies, I show that the liberalization of nancial ows between the central and peripheral economies potentially accounts for 34% to 55% of the observed increase in the current top one percent wealth share in the US. Yet, the model also implies that the trend in rising wealth concentration could reverse over the course of the twenty-rst century.

e key factor here is a contrast between (a) the low interest rate and the in ated market value of US domestic assets due to capital in ows and (b) the expansion of new risky investment out ows such as global equity, and the foreign direct investment (FDI) of multinational rms. e future trajectory of wealth concentration depends on the relative sizes of these two forces as they dictate household investment, debt raising, and domestic asset valuation. e main contribution of this paper is to use a tractable modeling framework to elucidate the linkage of global nancial ows to wealth concentration. I also o er a new angle on the rising wealth inequality in America, which is most o en seen simply as a permanent trend. is study is motivated by three major changes in the American capital market, which have drawn much a ention among economists in international nance and macroeconomics:

• Financial globalization: Capital account liberalization has integrated global nancial markets to a remarkable degree since the 1980s. e sum of foreign assets and liabilities in the US scaled by GDP-a de facto measure of nancial integration-surged from 48.3% in 1980 to 324% in 2017. As of 2017, foreign portfolio equity and FDI account for 40.3% of the total value of equity held by American households (see Figure 1a). Foreign investors own 30.0% of US corporate bonds outstanding and 44.5% of US treasuries (US Department of the Treasury 2018). • Banker to the world: e US is the world's dominant supplier of global reserve assets and xed income securities. Its cross-border asset positions, by contrast, are mainly composed of equity and FDI (see Figure 1b). Because of this two-way capital ow, the US is o en described as the "banker to the world" or even the "venture capitalist to the world. " (e.g. Rey 2007, Gourinchas andRey 2010) • Wealth concentration & household balance sheet: Wealth distribution and household balance sheet in the US have been shi ed asymmetrically across wealth groups. In terms of the distribution shape, the estimated wealth share of the top one percent of households, by wealth, rose from 24.3% to 41.8% from 1980 to 2011. (Saez and Zucman 2016) In terms of the balance sheet, those same households have substantially increased their exposure to equity, even though equity earnings yield has declined (see Figure 1c). e bo om 90 percent has not increased its share in equity as much, while its household debt has surged (see Figure  1d).

ese facts naturally lead us to ask the following questions: how does nancial globalization a ect the return on capital owned by the wealthiest magnates, such as George Soros and Phil Knight 2 , while promoting debt among the middle class? To what extent is wealth inequality driven by foreign investors pressing up US domestic asset prices? Is the increased wealth concentration permanent, or rather transitory? In this paper, I develop a uni ed model to answer these questions quantitatively. ree modeling ingredients deserve comment. First, I assume that households have decreasing relative risk aversion. 3 is implies that a uent households invest more heavily in risky assets than impoverished households do. More importantly -and somewhat subtly-the decreasing relative risk aversion makes a uent households readjust their balance sheet more elastically whenever there is a change in risk compensation; impoverished households are relatively stuck in safe assets or in debt.

Second, safe assets are short-term assets such as bank deposits whereas risky assets are longterm assets such as equities. An unanticipated drop in interest rates thus generates capital gains for equity holders, while deposit holders receive only contemporaneous yields. 2 George Soros is the founder of Soros Fund Management, which invests in foreign currency, equity, and xed income markets across the globe. Phil Knight is a cofounder of Nike, Inc. As of 2017, foreign direct investment outside North America accounts for 68.8% of Nike's long-term physical assets i.e., Property, Plant and Equipment. 3 I consider a standard HARA (hyperbolic absolute risk aversion) utility that exhibits decreasing relative risk aversion. In the paper, decreasing relative risk aversion is de ned only in this narrow class of utility functions.

e functional form has been used in various contexts including portfolio choice models (e.g., Litzenberger and Rubinstein 1976) and habit formation models (e.g. Campbell and Cochrane 1999). See Ogachi and Zhang (2001) and the related literature for micro-level evidence that supports decreasing relative risk aversion for portfolio choice.  ird, banks 4 in peripheral countries have limited abilities to create riskless debt, due to the inferior banking system relative to the nancial center country (i.e., the most nancially-developed country). e supply of safe assets is thus limited in those regions. Besides, since equity nancing involves a transaction cost beyond the risk premium, these banks end up facing a higher overall cost of capital. e total investment is thus restrained. Essentially, the nancial center country such as the US is endowed with a comparative advantage in manufacturing safe assets, and with absolute advantages in both safe and risky assets. e center country therefore exports safe assets, imports risky assets and, becomes a net debtor a er crossborder investment barriers are li ed.

With this structure in place, I rst show that global integration increases wealth concentration in the nancial center country, initially due to foreign capital pressing up domestic asset prices (i.e., the Revaluation E ect). e market value of domestic equity appreciates immediately as its required rate of return has fallen. A uent households reap more capital gains because their exposure to domestic equities is higher prior to the shock. In the model, the required expected return on domestic equity consists of the risk-free interest rate plus the domestic risk premium. A er global nancial markets are integrated, the overall required return for US domestic equity is decreased by the excess demand for US assets from foreign countries. e domestic equity price immediately re ects this change, generating capital gains for wealthy households who subsequently earn a lower expected return.

A more important point, however, is that this e ect is transitory. e in ated top wealth share gradually disappears and, in the distant future, it can even be reversed (i.e., the Declinein-return E ect). e basic principle of nance is the inverse relation between price and return. Whatever prompts asset-price in ation will, in turn, lower future expected returns on existing assets. e short-run e ect of capital gains dissipates gradually; within a generation, households smooth their consumption in the lower-interest-rate environment. Between generations, wealth inheritance is imperfect. In the new stationary state, the top wealth share is eventually suppressed by the lower future expected return on existing domestic assets.

What might generate a persistent concentration of wealth, in the case of nancial globalization, is asymmetric balance sheet readjustment amongst household groups in the new environment (i.e., the Rebalancing E ect). A er capital gains are realized, households in the nancial center country face a lower risk-free interest rate with the entry of foreign investors. At the same time, they gain access to new foreign risky assets, whether in the form of global equity or of the FDI out ow of multinational rms. us, the new investment portfolio, combining foreign and domestic risky assets, o ers a higher risk-to-reward ratio than the pure domestic counterpart in autarky. e tilted expansion of the investment frontier o ers households incentives to reallocate wealth to risky assets. A uent households increase exposure to risky assets more elastically than impoverished households, due to decreasing risk aversion. e average return on wealth between the two household groups diverges. Wealth concentration ensues in the nancial center country if this rebalancing e ect is large enough to counteract diminished returns on domestic assets.

I rst illustrate these key points with a simple setup. e model is then extended to include additional features-such as household debt, entrepreneurial income, and FDI-to gain a full understanding of the distributional e ects of nancial globalization. ese components reinforce the main idea: indebted households take on more debt as the interest rate falls. e increased household debt lowers the net worth of the bo om household group, which in turn raises the top wealth share in the nancial center country. Entrepreneurial income rises as entrepreneurs face a lower cost of capital. e market-equivalent value of entrepreneurial equity is further increased by a lower required return in the nancial market. Lastly, FDI out ow of domestic rms allows for more expansion of risky assets. It strengthens incentives-particularly for rich households-to reallocate wealth to risky assets. All in all, global integration provides an environment conducive to wealth concentration in the nancial center country 5 although, as before, the long-run trajectory still depends on the relative magnitudes of (a) the decrease in domestic interest rates and (b) the expansion of foreign assets.

Finally, I take the model to the data.

antitatively, to what extent does nancial globalization explain the recent change in US wealth distribution? How much of that change is permanent? I estimate the model's key parameters from various sources of data-ranging from the Fed's Survey of Consumer Finances to the BEA's National Economic Accounts-to assess the quantitative magnitude of the e ect of nancial globalization. e national accounts data are used to construct a time series of average realized returns on various asset classes, including cross-border assets and liabilities of the US economy. Each asset class is linked with its fundamentals-such as dividends, earnings, and rents at the macro-economy level-so as to estimate their risk premia, Sharpe ratios (i.e., risk premium divided by its standard deviation), and capital gains. With these estimates, I apply solution methods developed by the heterogeneous-agent macro literature e e ect is quantitatively sizable; in the calibrated model, a global integration shock alone accounts for 34% to 55% of the observed increase in the top one percent's wealth share in the United States since 1989. 6 At least over the past three decades, the portfolio rebalancing e ect 5 Distribution e ects in outside countries are less clear. Section 4.3 discusses cross-country implications. 6 I choose 1989 as the benchmark year for the pre-globalization economy due to data availability, such as Survey appears to outweigh diminished returns on domestic assets in light of the estimates in the data. Yet, the model leaves room for a reversal. e recent decline of yields on US domestic assets suggests that a reversal of the trend in rising wealth inequality is not impossible in the upcoming future. I provide back-of-the envelope calculations of when this would be the case and a full quantitative analysis to support this claim. Later on, I decompose the contributions of several factors to rising wealth concentration. For the top one percent's wealth share, widened wage inequality has a smaller impact than global nancial integration. is is because, in the calibrated model, a major source of income for the wealthy is capital, not labor.

By shedding light on the architecture of global nance, this study o ers a novel argument for why, amongst the developed economies, the US has experienced a particularly large increase in wealth concentration.

e US is o en referred to as the global banker, due to its exclusive role as liquidity provider in international nancial markets (Gourinchas and Rey 2007, Gourinchas and Rey 2010, Eichengreen 2011). My paper suggests that this unique function of the US economy played a prominent role in transforming domestic nancial prices during the period of rapid global integration, thereby fostering wealth concentration amongst American households. It also provides theoretical underpinnings for cross-country studies nding that capital account liberalization was followed by increased income inequality 7  Methodologically, this paper contributes to the literature by proposing a tractable model for studying macro-nance implications of global nancial ows. It has been widely documented that a higher foreign demand for US debt securities can account for a decline in safe yields over the past decades (e.g. Caballero et al. 2008, Mendoza et al. 2009). Yet, less a ention has been paid to the relationship between foreign factors and other nancial variables, such as risk premium, Sharpe ratio, required expected return, corporate pro ts, and the portfolio frontier, which are all essential to understanding the distribution of capital income. Even studies that incorporate one or two of these elements require heavy numerical computation (Dou andVerdelhan 2015, Maggiori 2017). e model in this paper is more versatile. It allows for comparative statics with simple equilibrium solutions as well as a full quantitative analysis with numerical simulations. ese modeling tools can potentially be used to understand time-varying changes in returns on various assets (Jordà et al. 2017), especially in the international context. of Consumer Finances. See Section 5 for more details. 7 In particular, Jaumo e et al. (2008) shows that nancial globalization and FDI are associated with an increase in inequality, much more so than is trade liberalization. Cross-country implications of my model are revisited in Section 4.3. 8 See Helpman (2018) for the most up-to-date review on globalization and inequality.

Lastly, this study adds a new angle to the literature on heterogeneous-agent macroeconomics. I treat capital income more carefully than existing studies on wealth inequality. I also elaborate on the underlying mechanism behind a structural change in capital income. Since Pike y (2014) was published, capital income has gained much a ention as a crucial driver for rising wealth inequality in advanced economies. Many studies concur (e.g. Hungerford 2011, Bach et al. 2018, Fagereng et al. 2018). Yet, the standard models in the literature simply abstract capital income into the rental rate r of physical capital (Aiyagari 1994), the risk-free interest rate (Bewley 1983, Hugge 1993, or the pro ts of non-public rms ( Champernowne (1953). 10 Unlike these studies, I shed light on determinants of nancial variables -including risk premium, Sharpe ratio, capital gains, and portfolio frontier-and how changes in these variables transform wealth distribution over di erent time horizons.

is framework can be applied to structural changes other than nancial globalization, such as nancial innovation and capital tax reform. e rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a stripped-down version of the model to present my core predictions. Section 3 develops general equilibrium foundations. Section 4 discusses distributional e ects of security market liberalization and foreign direct investment as well as the cross-country implications. Section 5 takes the model to the data, conrming that empirical pa erns are consistent with the main predictions of the model. Estimates for the key parameters are also presented. Section 6 uses a calibrated model to assess to the extent to which nancial globalization can account for the observed increased in wealth concentration in the United States. Section 7 concludes. 9 Kacperczyk et al. (2018) agree on the importance of endogenous portfolio choices in driving wealth inequality in a closed economy, although their study focuses on the advancement of information acquisition technology and does not consider the revaluation gain channel. 10 e literature on Pareto-inequality models has a long history and numerous applications. See Gabaix (2009), Jones (2015) and Benhabib and Bisin (2018) and for recent surveys of studies.


Core Model

To illustrate the mechanism, I begin by considering the simplest case of nancial globalization: the set of investment opportunities available to households is xed, and then transformed by global integration of nancial markets. e interest rates on these assets are exogenously given and then changed. I characterize the immediate and persistent e ects of this shock on the household wealth distribution. e model is extended step by step in later sections: from market clearing conditions to labor income and household debt.


Setup

Households Consider a closed economy populated by a continuum of households. e measure of households is normalized to unity. Household i is endowed with initial wealth drawn from a probability density function, g 0 . Time is continuous. In a closed economy, each household has access to two types of investments: a risk-free asset and a domestic risky asset. e riskfree asset yields r * dt with certainty. e domestic risky asset yields (r * + σ 1 s * 1 )dt + σ 1 dz 1t , where σ 1 s * 1 represents the risk premium and dz 1t represents the increment of a Wiener process. To conceptualize the price of risk, I decompose the risk premium into two parts: the standard deviation of returns, σ 1 , and the Sharpe ratio (=an asset's risk premium divided by its standard deviation) of the domestic risky asset, s * 1 . By de nition, s * 1 can be viewed as a reward for taking one unit of domestic risk. e domestic risky asset is indexed by 1. An asterisk in the superscript is used to indicate an autarky price. e portfolio frontier spanned by the two basis assets, {r * , (s * 1 , σ 1 )}, plays a central role in households' saving decisions. 11 For the moment, assume that the portfolio frontier is exogenously given, so the values of r * and s * 1 stay constant over time. We will consider a general equilibrium foundation in the next section.

Given the constant portfolio frontier, {r * , (s * 1 , σ 1 )}, household i maximizes lifetime utility by choosing consumption ow, c it , and the share of savings in the domestic risky asset, θ 1it . Let δ denote the time discount rate. Household i born at time 0 seeks to maximize 11 e Mutual Fund eorem (e.g. Merton 1971) implies that {r * , (s * 1 , σ 1 )} embodies 1 risk-free asset and N risky assets without loss of generality. e budget constraint is given by
max θ 1it ,c it E 0 ∞ 0 e −(δ+m)t log(c it − κ)dt(1)da it = [(r * + σ 1 s * 1 θ 1it )a it − c it ]dt + σ 1 θ 1it a it dz 1t(2)
In the core model, nancial assets are the only sources of income for households. e two parameters, m and κ, in the household's problem deserve further comments.

First, m is intended to capture the death probability. As in the perpetual youth model (Yaari 1965, Blanchard 1985, a fraction m of households die and lose their wealth at every instantaneous time. ese households are replaced by o springs whose wealth endowments are re-drawn from the initial density distribution, g 0 . Wealth dispersion of the newborn households, g 0 , di ers from wealth dispersion of the deceased households, g t . 12 e discrepancy between the two distributions implies that wealth of parents is not fully transferred to wealth of their children. A large value of m intensi es the imperfect wealth inheritance.

Second, κ > 0 in the ow utility captures decreasing relative risk aversion. 13 is assumption implies that wealthy households not only invest in the risky asset more heavily than impoverished households, but they are also more responsive to a change in risk compensation. is property can be seen most clearly from solutions of a household's problem (Merton 1971)
c it = (δ + m)a it + (r * − δ − m)a Consumption Flow θ 1it = s * 1 σ 1 1 − a a it

Share of Risky Savings

where a ≡ κ r * denotes the wealth cuto . All households choose to retain wealth above this cuto to avoid negative consumption (i.e., a it ≥ a). Expression (3) shows that the share of savings invested in the domestic risky asset increases with individual wealth, a it , and falls to zero when a it = a. Furthermore, ∂ 2 θ 1it ∂a it ∂s * 1 > 0 implies that wealthy households respond to a change in s * 1 more elastically.

ere are several ways to interpret a. e cuto can be viewed as the minimum level of wealth that should be retained every period. Households whose wealth is near this threshold invest more heavily in the safe asset to meet the subsistence consumption level, κ, without any uncertainty. On the other hand, households with a su ciently large stock of wealth are relatively free of this concern so they invest more heavily in the domestic risky asset. Note that (i) household debt and 12 Every k'th moment of g 0 is assumed to be nite, which implies that g 0 does not have excessively thick tails. Examples of such distributions include normal, and lognormal distributions. Also, I impose ∞ −∞ g 0 (a)da ≤ ∞ −∞ g t (a)da. e strict inequality can be interpreted as a deadweight loss. 13 e ow utility in the objective function belongs to the class of HARA (hyperbolic absolute risk aversion) utility functions. is functional form has been used in various studies such as portfolio choice models (e.g., Litzenberger and Rubinstein 1976). In my paper, decreasing relative risk aversion is de ned only in this narrow class of utility functions.

(ii) private equity are missing in the core model. I will discuss them in later sections.

Asset Price Another important assumption is that the domestic risky asset is a long-term asset, much like equity. e safe asset is assumed to be a short-term asset, much like bank deposit. To capture this aspect, let n it denote the number of domestic risky asset shares invested by household i, and p t denote the price per share. Each share is a contract that transfers σ 1 dz 1τ to its holder. e contract pledges constant future dividend xdt for all τ ≥ t. Given an exogenous market price {r * , (s * 1 , σ 1 )}, the expected return on the risky asset in the budget constraint (2) can be decomposed into
(r * + σ 1 s * 1 )dt Required Expected Return = E t [dp t ] p t Price Change + xdt p t Dividend Yield(4)
For tractability, I focus on the case where x = r * + σ 1 s * 1 and p t = 1 for all t. 14 e price of the domestic risky asset stays constant as long as there is no unanticipated change in the economy. e savings in the domestic risky asset can then be wri en as θ 1it a it ≡ n it . Conversely, an unanticipated change in the required expected return generates capital gains or losses for risky asset holders. Suppose, for example, the market required return drops unexpectedly to r + σ 1 s 1 at time T , with x being xed. en the price of the domestic risky asset should rise immediately to r * +σ 1 s * 1 r+σ 1 s 1 > 1 to satisfy (4). e price remains constant therea er. e safe asset, on the other hand, does not pledge future cash ows beyond contemporaneous yield r * . No capital gains or losses are generated even if there is a change in r * Wealth Distribution Lastly, let me de ne a measure of wealth concentration in the economy. We focus on a trajectory of aggregate shocks in which dz 1t = 0 for all t. Yet, households consider ex ante volatility, V ar[σ 1 dz 1t ] = σ 2 1 dt, in nancial markets. 15 e c.d.f. and p.d.f. of the wealth distribution, G t (a) and g t (a), are de ned over this zero trajectory, so they evolve deterministically. We can characterize the evolution of g t by the below 14 In other words, each share of the domestic risky asset pays variable cash ow σ 1 dz 1t and xed dividend xdt at each instantaneous time. Given this, we can rewrite the budget constraint, (2), as 
[(r * + σ 1 s * 1 a it )a it − c it ] dt + σ 1 θ 1it a it dz 1t ≡ [r * (1 − θ 1it )a it + xθ 1it a it − c it ] dt + n it (σ 1 dz 1t + dp t ).+ mg 0 (a) (ii) Newborn − d da [{(r * + σ 1 s * 1 θ 1 (a))a − c(a)} (iii) Savings g t (a)](5)
Here, θ 1 (a) and c(a) indicate portfolio and consumption choices of a household whose wealth level is a. e di erential equation in (5) is o en referred to as the Kolmogorov Forward Equation (KFE) in the heterogeneous-agent model literature. e intuition for the KFE is as follows: the rst term on the right hand side represents the wealth distribution of households who drop out due to death. e second term is the wealth endowment distribution of new-born households. e last term represents a change in the wealth distribution driven by savings of individual households. See Appendix D.2 and D.3 for the derivation of the KFE and its convergence property.

It is worth noting that, as time passes by, g t gradually converges to the stationary wealth distribution, g ∞ . In principle, a stationary wealth distribution is de ned as a wealth distribution that stays constant over the course of time, i.e. d dt g ∞ (a) = 0, as the economy moves along the zero trajectory. Given any initial distribution, the long-term wealth distribution of the economy coincides with g ∞ . So one can think of g ∞ as the distribution of wealth that will eventually arise in the distant future.

With this apparatus, I shed light on two measures of wealth inequality, Ω t and Ω ∞ , to characterize the short-run and long-run e ects of nancial globalization respectively.


De nition 1.

Let Ω t denote the top one percent's wealth share in g t . Also, let Ω ∞ denote the top one percent's wealth share in the stationary state, which is approximated by the Pareto exponent 17 of g ∞ . In other words,
Ω t = ∞ G −1 t (0.99) ag t (a)da ∞ −∞ ag t (a)da
and Ω ∞ ≡ 100 where the Pareto exponent, ξ, is de ned as a constant stemming from lim a→∞ g∞(τ a) g∞(a) = τ −(1+ξ) . Note that the approximation is exact (i.e., lim t→∞ Ω t = Ω ∞ ) if g ∞ coincides with a Pareto distribution. ese measures, Ω t and Ω ∞ , are used to investigate the short-run and long-run e ects of nancial globalization on wealth concentration respectively. e top 1% bracket is chosen for illustration, and can be replaced with any n% without loss of generality. Suppose now that global capital markets are integrated unexpectedly at time T . One can use d log Ω T to capture an immediate increase in the top one percent wealth share, and d log Ω ∞ to capture a long-run increase.


E ect of Financial Globalization

I next investigate the e ect of nancial globalization. Prior to global integration, all households face the portfolio frontier spanned by {r * , (s * 1 , σ 1 )}: there are a single risk-free asset whose return is given by r * , and a domestic risky asset whose risk premium is given by σ 1 s * 1 . What nancial globalization does is to transform the set of investment opportunities (=the portfolio frontier) available to households from the le to the right.
{r * , (s * 1 , σ 1 )} ⇒ {r, (s 1 , σ 1 ), (s 2 , σ 2 )}
e correlation between dz 1t and dz 2t is given by ρ ∈ [0, 1). ere are two changes. First, the risk-free interest rate, and the Sharpe ratio of the domestic risky asset both take new values. Second, households gain new access to a foreign risky asset, which is indexed by 2.

e key idea here is that nancial globalization leads to a biased technological change in the US capital market due to the asymmetry in global nancial markets. For expositional purposes, think of the US as a small open economy for the moment, and consider the following example. A er global markets are integrated at time T , the nancial center country undergoes a change in the portfolio frontier such that
(a) r < r * (b) s 1 = s * 1 (c) σ 2 > 0(6)
at is, households begin to face a lower risk-free interest rate, r, possibly because foreign investors willingly purchase US safe assets at a lower interest rate than domestic households do. For the moment, the Sharpe ratio of the domestic risky asset is assumed to be unchanged in the nancial center country. Lastly, σ 2 > 0 implies that newly-added foreign assets are risky assets. As we show later, s 1 could di er from s * 1 in general equilibrium depending on the risk pro le of the outside world. In later sections I will formally characterize under what circumstances global integration results in these changes and how this relates to the asymmetry between the nancial center country and peripheral economies. e rst question we ask is the following: given (6), how does nancial globalization transform the evolution of the wealth distribution in the short run and in the long run? Essentially, global integration leads households' budget constraints to become da it
Change in Wealth = r + θ 1it θ 2it σ 1 s 1 σ 2 s 2 + m a it − c it dt + a it θ 1it σ 1 dz 1t + a it θ 2it σ 2 dz 2t
from time T onward. To avoid pathological situations, I make two assumptions. First, I only consider cases where the optimal choices of θ 1it and θ 2it are non-negative. Second, the wealth cuto , a, is assumed constant. is prevents households at the bo om from suddenly falling into negative consumption (i.e. negative in nite utility) due to an unanticipated drop in r. 18 Under this setup, Proposition 1 below characterizes short-term and long-term changes in the top wealth share upon global nancial integration.

Proposition 1. e short-term and long-term e ects of nancial globalization on the top one percent wealth share can be summarized as follows: 19
d log Ω T = − φ 1 d log(r + σ 1 s 1 ) (i) Revaluation E ect (7) d log Ω ∞ = φ 2 d log(r + σ 1 s 1 ) (ii) Decline-in-return E ect + φ 3 d log s 2 − φ 4 d log ρ (iii) Rebalancing E ect(8)
where φ 1 , φ 2 , φ 3 , and φ 4 are all positive coe cients.

Proof. See Appendix A.1 Corollary 1. Financial globalization widens wealth inequality immediately by generating capital gains. Wealth inequality is increased permanently only if s 2 and 1/ρ are su ciently large.

e core message of Proposition 1 can be summarized with three points. First, nancial globalization raises wealth inequality in the short term through domestic asset price in ation (i.e.,

the Revaluation E ect). Recall that the discount rate for the domestic risky asset consists of the risk-free rate plus the risk premium. An unanticipated integration of global capital markets lowers the market required return, r + σ 1 s 1 , while the pledged future cash ow, xdt = (r + σ 1 s * 1 )dt, remains unchanged. e price of the domestic risky asset, p T , rises immediately in response to 18 e constant wealth cuto is equivalent to assuming that the subsistence level of consumption is variable and proportional to a (i.e., κ = ra a er the shock, and r * a before the shock). As in habit formation models (e.g. Campbell and Cochrane 1999), I treat κ as a variable rather than a constant parameter. Alternatively, one can avoid the negative in nite utility issue by assuming that the wealth distribution g t (·) prior to T has no mass below a = κ r . 19 Note here that, for illustration, I take di erentiation with respect to (r + σ 1 s 1 ) instead of r and s 1 separately. e la er would yield di erent coe cients for r and s 1 . this change. Since a uent households have a larger exposure to the domestic risky asset prior to nancial globalization, the top one percent's wealth share, Ω T , rises immediately. e e ect is greater when the required expected return drops more acutely, as is shown in (7).

Second, this increase is only transitory and -in the new stationary state -the concentration of wealth is eventually suppressed by the lower expected return on the domestic assets. (i.e., the Decline-in-return E ect). e basic tenet of nance is the inverse relation between price and return. e low discount factor that o ers a uent households capital gains, in turn, lowers the future expected return on the domestic risky asset. e e ect of capital gains wears o gradually through consumption smoothing within a generation. Wealth inheritance is imperfect between generations. In the end, a wealth distribution in an open economy converges to
g(a) = C(a)(a − a) −1− m r+R Σ −1 R−δ (9) where C(a) is a function of a, R ≡ [σ 1 s 1 ; σ 2 s 2 ] and Σ ≡ [σ 2 1 , ρσ 1 σ 2 ; ρσ 1 σ 2 , σ 2 2 ]
. e stationary wealth distribution has a thick right tail, and the Pareto exponent 20 is given by 1
ξ ≡ r+R Σ −1 R−δ m
. is expression shows that the lower expected returns on the domestic assets, dr = d(r+σ 1 s 1 ) < 0, exert a downward force on wealth concentration. Indeed, this is precisely the reason why term (i) and (ii) have opposite signs in Proposition 1. Without any countervailing forces, wealth concentration in the nancial center country would rst increase, and then revert back to a lower number, even lower than the initial state.

A er all, what might generate a persistent increase in wealth concentration is the asymmetric portfolio reallocation between di erent household groups (i.e. the Rebalancing E ect). A unent households increase their investment share in risky assets more elastically, while impoverished 20 e existence of all k'th moments of g 0 (i.e. g 0 has a thin tail) ensures that C does not distort the exponent as a goes to in nity. Examples of such thin tail distributions include log-normal distribution. e proof of Proposition 1 in Appendix A.1 o ers more details.

households are relatively stuck in the safe asset. Figure 2 illustrates the mechanism with a diagram from the static Capital Asset Pricing Model (Sharpe 1964). e key factor here is the slope of the capital allocation line -the do ed line connecting the risk-free to risky assets in the diagram. Households choose their portfolio such that their indi erence curves between risk and expected return are tangent to the capital allocation line. In a closed economy, wealthy households choose a riskier portfolio due to the decreasing relative risk aversion assumption. In an open economy, the expected return on the domestic risky asset, r + σ 1 s 1 , falls. Yet, an expansion of the portfolio frontier (indicated by the curve connecting stars) increases the slope of the capital allocation line. is provides incentives for households to reallocate their wealth more towards the risky domestic and foreign assets. A uent households respond to this change more elastically than impoverished households due to decreasing relative risk aversion. us, capital return inequality between the households is widened further by nancial globalization.

is rebalancing e ect exerts an upward force to support Ω ∞ in the long run. e expression in (8) suggests that the rebalancing e ect is larger when a newly-accessed foreign risky asset has a higher reward-to-risk ratio, s 2 , and a lower correlation with domestic assets, ρ. Financial globalization leads to persistent wealth concentration only if these forces are strong enough to counteract diminished returns on the domestic assets. Corollary 1 formalizes this intuition.

Two simplifying assumptions deserve comments. First, the core model does not feature household debt. All households choose to retain positive net worth throughout their lifespans. In section 5, I extend the model such that some households have negative net worth. Numerical simulations show that indebted households begin to take on more debts as r drops upon nancial globalization. Net worth of households in the bo om decile falls, which raises the top one percent's wealth share more than the illustrative model suggests. Second, every household has unrestricted access to risky investment. In practice, entrepreneurial households might hold a large share of stock in certain companies and some of these holdings are private equity. In the next section, I do extend the model to allow for private equity. e extension only strengthens the main results; global integration of capital markets increases entrepreneurial income and in ates its market-equivalent valuation.


Back-of-the-Envelope Calculation

One can use this core setup-before turning to a full-blown quantitative model -to roughly gauge the magnitude of the e ect of nancial globalization. e aim of this back-of-the-envelope calculation is to quantitatively disentangle the basic forces that transform the distribution of wealth. As the rst step, let me invoke the formula for the stationary wealth distribution
g ∞ (a) = C(a)(a − a) −1− m r+s 2 −δ
In a closed economy, the interest rates are given byr = r * ands = s * 1 . In an open economy,
r = r ands = [σ 1 s 1 , σ 2 s 2 ]Σ −1 [σ 1 s 1 , σ 2 s 2 ]
. e la er indicates the Sharpe ratio of the open economy portfolio consisting of the domestic and foreign risky assets. As explained earlier, one can approximate the top one percent's wealth share with the Pareto exponent of the stationary wealth distribution, i.e., Ω ∞ = 100 −1− m r+s 2 −δ e next step is to calculate a change in wealth concentration by calibrating the parameters of the core model. I pick 1989 as the benchmark year for the pre-globalization period. 21 I set r * = 0.027, s * 1 = 0.029, and δ = 0.05. r * is calibrated from the 1-year treasury yield a er in ation around 1989. s * 1 stems from the estimated Sharpe ratio for the domestic portfolio, which I will revisit in Section 5.3. δ is the standard value for the discount rate. e remaining parameter in the Pareto exponent is m, which represents the imperfection of wealth inheritance between generations. I leave m as a free parameter; the value of m is chosen to t the top one percent's wealth share in year 1989 from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Finally, I calibrate the average portfolio weights for the top 1 percent, the 1-9 percent and the bo om 90 percent households from the SCF. e core part of this exercise is to change the values ofr ands to measure the e ect of a nancial globalization shock on the top one percent's wealth share. Table 1 presents three scenarios. In scenario (1), the risk-free interest falls to 0.01 and the Sharpe ratio of the market portfolio rises 0.327. e top 1% wealth share immediately increases by 1.8%p due to capital gains. e share continues to increase because, in this scenario, the portfolio rebalancing e ect outweighs the decline in return on the domestic assets. e model-implied increase, 8.8%p, is comparable in size to the actual increase in the data. By contrast, in scenario (2), the Sharpe ratio does not increase as much, 22 so the model exhibits an inverse-U shape transitional dynamics. Along this transitional dynamics, the top one percent wealth share rst rises due to the revaluation e ect, but eventually reverts back. e new stationary state ends up having a lower wealth inequality than the initial state. A similar pa ern arises in scenario (3), where the risk-free interest falls zero. One can also see that the current trend in rising wealth concentration can reverse in the future if 21 e year 1989 is chosen as the benchmark year due to data availability, such as Survey of Consumer Finances, which will be later used for a full-blown quantitative analysis. I use the same year for the back-of-the-envelope calculation to maintain consistency. 22 One may notice that the back-of-the-envelope calculation is highly sensitive to a change in the Sharpe ratio. e sensitivity is alleviated if the utility function is replaced by one with a higher risk aversion than log utility. For example, one may assume u(c it ) = (cit−κ) 1−γ 1−γ and γ = 3. In this case, the Sharpe ratio should rise to 0.37 to generate the same magnitude as in Scenario (1). the expansion of foreign investment no longer increases the Sharpe ratio as much (i.e., scenario (1) ⇒ scenario (3)), or the expected return on domestic assets falls too sharply (i.e., scenario (1) ⇒ scenario (2)).


Closed Economy

Next, I turn to market clearing conditions. e portfolio frontier is now determined jointly by (a) saving decisions of households and (b) funding decisions of banks. e core element here is that a country's banking system constitutes a source of comparative advantage in global nancial markets. To model this feature, I specify the supply side of assets (in the banking sector) and the market clearing conditions. I rst consider a closed-economy setup and then move on to an open economy.

e aim of this analysis is to disentangle the basic forces that determine the market interest rates. In later sections, I shall explain how this whole structure can be embedded into quantitative analysis.


Model Extension

Households e household side remains largely unchanged. Let {r * t , (s * 1t , σ 1 )} denote an equilibrium portfolio frontier in autarky at period t. Households take these price processes as given.

eir saving decisions constitute the demand side of nancial assets. De ne S t ≡ A t ≡ a it di and S 1t ≡ θ 1it a it di. Here, S t represents the total savings invested by households, while S 1t represents the savings in the domestic risky asset. Using θ 1it = 23 we can rewrite the closed economy saving curves as
s * 1t σ 1 (1 − a a it ),S t = A t , S 1t = s * 1 σ 1 (A t − κ)(10)
Aggregate savings the in domestic risky asset increases with the Sharpe ratio. ese two savings curves, along with the investment curves that will be de ned momentarily, are used to pin down the equilibrium portfolio frontier in nancial markets.

Banks Financial assets are manufactured by the representative bank -a consolidated entity encompassing private companies, nancial intermediaries and the government. Every period, the bank generates
dπ t = Φ(K t )dt +σK t dz 1t
by investing K t units of capital within the boundary of a country. Production involves raw output volatilityσ in proportion to the investment level. e production function, Φ(K t ), exhibits diminishing marginal returns. 24 Funding decisions of the bank constitute the supply side of assets. e bank creates assets by converting its future cash ow into risk-free and risky tranches. e bank is a price taker and there is no adjustment cost in changing K t . us, they simply maximize contemporaneous pro t 25
V * t dt Private Equity Income ≡ max Kt,Dt,Et dπ t − r * t D t dt Debt Income − (r * t + σ 1 s * 1t + τ )E t dt Public Equity Income − σ 1 E t dz 1t
Public Equity Volatility (11) 23 As in the core model, I assume that a is given as constant to avoid the negative in nite utility issue associated with an unanticipated structural change. (See footnote 18) Also, it will later turn out that (r t , s 1t ) is a function of the aggregate state variable A t in equilibrium, which itself follows a stochastic process. Unlike Merton (1971), this feature adds extra complexity to the Hamiltonian-Jacobi-Bellman equation. See Appendix B for more details. 24 at is, Φ > 0, Φ < 0, lim K→0 Φ (K) = −∞ and lim K→∞ Φ (K) = 0. In this sense, my model is a variant of Cox et al. (1985), which assumes constant return to capital (i.e. Φ(K t ) = αK t and dK t = αK t +σ 1 K t dz) 25 Appendix D.4 studies the associated decision makings in a discrete time framework over the interval [t, t + h], and the model here corresponds to the limit case when h converges to 0. subject to the constraints
K t ≡ D t + E t , σ 1 =σK t /E t , D t ≤ λK t (12)
where D t is the value of debt, E t is the value of equity and σ 1 is the standard deviation of returns per unit of equity outstanding.

Let me rst elaborate on the objective function. V * t dt represents the excess pro t that stems from the gap between the average physical rate of returns and the average cost of capital. I simply assume that V * t dt is not distributed to households as there is a separate entrepreneur of the bank who monopolizes technology. e entrepreneur is in e ect a hand-to-mouth agent who consumes V * t dt immediately. e bank relies on outside capital. Debt holders receive the risk-free rate. Equity holders are compensated with the risk premium in proportion to the risk per unit of equity. Equity nancing involves a deadweight transaction cost, τ , besides the risk premium, so the bank has incentives to rely on debt as a cheaper means of capital raising. Appendix A.7 provides more explanation about the relation between τ and the money premium in the banking literature.

Turning to the balance sheet conditions, the rst constraint in (12) implies that the value of assets should be equal to the value of debt and equity outstanding. e next constraint implies that the issuance of debt-like securities scales up the risk per unit of equity. Essentially, risky asset holders bear all the risk. Lastly, the maximum leverage is limited up to λK t . λ indicates a country's capacity to create safe assets by tranching. Later on, I will assume that peripheral countries have a lower value of λ than the nancial center country, which implies that the ability to manufacture safe assets is not identical across economies. Besides, because of τ , rms in peripheral countries end up facing a higher overall cost of capital. e total investment is restrained. Essentially, the nancial center country is endowed with a comparative advantage in manufacturing safe assets and absolute advantages in both types of assets, relative to the outside world.

We can derive the aggregate supply curves of the domestic assets from the funding decisions of the bank: I t = K t and I 1t = E t , with σ 1 =σK t /E t . Solving the bank's optimization problem, it is easy to show 26
I t = Φ −1 (r * t +σs * 1t + τ − τ λ), I 1t = (1 − λ)I t(13)
e volatility per share is σ 1 =σ 1−λ . A quick inspection shows that both of these curves are 26 e total investment, K t , is simply pinned down by the rst order condition, Φ (K t ) = r +σs 1 + τ (1 − λ). e issuance of equity is pinned down by the binding constraint, E t = (1 − λ)K t , as equity nancing involves extra costs besides the risk premium. downward sloping in terms of the market funding cost, r t +σs 1t , and the Sharpe ratio of the country's risky asset, s * 1t . Figure 3 displays these two downward-sloping investment curves in tandem with the saving curves.


Market Clearing Conditions

A closed economy equilibrium is de ned as a path of price vectors that clear local nancial markets. So each country has its own interest rates before the integration of global nancial markets. Formally speaking, I make the following de nition.

De nition 2. A closed economy equilibrium is a stochastic process, {r * t , (s * 1t , σ 1 )} t≥0 , which clears local nancial markets: S t = I t and S 1t = I 1t for all t.

Given this setup, we can solve for the equilibrium values of r * and s * 1 by using the two market clearing conditions. Merging (10) and (13), we can write the solutions as
s * 1 (A) =σA/(A − a) (14) r * (A) = Φ (A) −σ 2 A/(A − a) − τ + τ λ(15)
when the aggregate wealth stock is given by A t = A. Notice that the market clearing interest rates can be expressed as a function of the total wealth stock. Essentially, A t acts as the state variable of the economy. I henceforth use the notation r * t ≡ r * (A t ) and s * 1t ≡ s * 1 (A t ). A er all, A t evolves according to a stochastic process that will be discussed shortly, and so do the interest rates. e (long-term) domestic risky asset is modeled as a contingent security that pledges future dividend x t ≡ r * (A t ) + s * 1 (A t )σ 1 for all τ ≥ t as in Section 2. e dividend stream now depends on the realization of the state variable.


Comparative Statics

Consider two countries: US and FO. In this two-economy world, US represents the nancial center country, while FO represents the rest of the world. e key di erence 27 between the central and peripheral economies is their ability to create safe assets in the banking sector. I assume λ U S > λ F O , so US has comparative advantage in manufacturing safe assets. Along with the imperfect correlation between dz 1t and dz 2t (= diversi cation bene t from the foreign risky asset), the di erent size of λ U S is the minimal building block to provide microfoundation for the biased change in the portfolio frontier in Section 2. Additionally, one may assume that the output volatility is lower in the nancial center country (i.e.σ U S <σ F O ), which helps improve a quantitative t to the data in later sections.

Before turning to dynamics, we can use the solutions in (14) and (15) to conduct comparative static analysis. By log-di erentiating the two, it is straightforward to prove the following statement:

Proposition 2. Suppose that US and FO are identical in size (i.e., A 1t = A 2t = A). en, in autarky, FO has a lower risk-free rate and a higher Sharpe ratio than US. at is,
(a) d log r * = φ 5 d log λ Financial Friction − φ 6 d logσ Output Volatility (b) d log s * 1 = φ 7 d logσ Output Volatility
where φ 5 , φ 6 and φ 7 are positive coe cients. Furthermore, FO has a lower required return on risky assets, and a lower excess pro t in autarky:
d log(r * +σs * 1 ) = φ 8 d log λ Financial Friction d log(V * ) = φ 9 d log λ Financial Friction
where φ 8 and φ 9 are again postive coe cients.

e core message of Figure 3 and the associated proposition is that peripheral economies tend to have an equilibrium in which the risk-free interest rate is low, the expected required return on the risky asset is low, and the Sharpe ratio of the domestic risky asset is high. e pledgeability of future cash ows plays a central role.

e production sector's limited ability to promise a xed return dictates the use of costly fund raising. e supply of safe contractual claims is limited, but risky contractual claims are relatively more abundant due toσ. To clear the market, a higher compensation should be o ered to those who hold risky assets. e expected return on the domestic risky asset, r * +σs * 1 , and the excess pro t, V * are also lower when λ is small.

Remark 1: Dynamics e earlier results compare two economies with identical sizes of wealth stocks. As time passes by, the wealth stock of each economy grows and the stationary state level of wealth is a ected by various parameters including λ andσ. In the stationary state, as it turns out, the wealth stock is lower in the FO than in the US. In Appendix A.2, I show that most of the results in Proposition 2 remain intact even when we compare stationary state interest rates of the two economies, provided that λ is su ciently small. e appendix also presents the equilibrium law of motion for wealth stock.

4 Financial Globalization e next step of the analysis is to explore changes in the US portfolio frontier when the two economies, US and FO, become integrated. In this section, I decompose nancial globalization into two stages: (i) security market liberalization and (ii) FDI liberalization.


Security Market Liberalization

Security market liberalization allows US households to invest in assets issued by the foreign bank.

e interest rates of the existing domestic assets are changed. e foreign risky asset, characterized by (s 2t , σ 2 ), is also added to the portfolio frontier, so US households are given more investment opportunities. To specify the market clearing conditions, de ne
S k 1t ≡ θ k 1it a k it di, S k 2t ≡ θ k 2it a k it di S k t ≡ a k it di
for each origin country k ∈ {U S, F O}. In the above expressions, S k 1t represents country k's savings in the US risky asset, while S k 2t represents country k's savings in the FO risky asset. Finally, S k t is country k's savings in all types of assets. I de ne an open economy equilibrium as a path of the interest rates that clears the entire global nancial markets. A er security market liberalization, the two economies are coordinated by a common set of interest rates. e market clearing conditions pin down the equilibrium values of r, s 1 and s 2 . 28 When the wealth stocks of the two countries are identical in size, one can verify that security market liberalization transforms the portfolio frontier of the US economy as described by Proposition 3, thereby altering the country's wealth distribution.

De nition 3. An open economy equilibrium is a stochastic process, {r t , (s 1t , σ 1 ), (s 2t , σ 2 )} t≥0 , which clears the global nancial markets:
k∈{F O,U S} (S k t − I k t ) = 0, k∈{F O,U S} S k 1t = I U S 1t and k∈{F O,U S} S k 2t = I F O 2t .
Proposition 3. (i) A er security market liberalization, the US becomes the exporter of safe asset and the net importer of global risky assets. US households face 29
(a) r < r * (b) r + σ 1 s 1 < r * + σs * 1 (c) V > V * (d) s mix ≥ s 1
where s mix is the Sharpe ratio of the optimal portfolio combining the foreign and domestic risky assets. (ii) e Shape ratio of the domestic risky asset rises (i.e. s 1 > s * 1 ) if and only ifσ 1 < ρσ 2

Proof. Appendix A.4

Proposition 3(i) states that security market liberalization o ers new risky investment opportunities for US households, while simultaneously decreasing the required expected returns on the US domestic assets. Figure 4 illustrates the basic intuition by examining a special case ρ = 1 (i.e., the foreign and domestic risky assets are perfect substitutes.) e supply of safe assets is limited in the FO. Besides, since equity nancing involves a deadweight transaction cost beside the risk premium, the FO bank faces a higher overall cost of capital. e total investment is thus restrained. A er security market liberalization, US should sell its assets to FO and become a net debtor to clear the global nancial markets. e excess demand from FO -as indicated by the solid horizontal line in Figure 4a-exerts a downward force on r + σ 1 s 1 and r in the US economy. It is now easy to show the excess pro t increases (i.e., V > V * ) as the US bank faces a lower average cost of capital. s mix ≥ s 1 is also straightforward.

How does nancial globalization change the risk premium (or the Sharpe ratio) of the US domestic risky asset? While the core model assumed s * 1 = s 1 , Proposition 3(ii) gives a sharper prediction. e change in s 1 depends on the risk pro le of the outside world. If FO is signi cantly riskier,σ U S < ρσ F O , US households should bear more risk a er security market liberalization, so the domestic Sharpe ratio rises to clear the market. Figure 4b illustrates this point when ρ = 1. If this is not the case (e.g.σ U S =σ F O and ρ < 1), the domestic Sharpe ratio falls a er global integration. is is because diversi cation from the foreign risky asset helps create a safer portfolio, so a lower value of s 1 is enough to induce US households to clear the markets.
a F O it di. us, one can write r t ≡ r(A 1t + A 2t ), s 1t ≡ s 1 (A 1t + A 2t ), s 2t ≡ s 2 (A 1t + A 2t ) and V t ≡ V (A 1t + A 2t )
. 29 In the statement, r < r * is a simpli ed expression for r(A 1t + A 2t ) < r * (A 1t ) where A 1t = A 2t = A (i.e., the US and FO are identical in size.) e same notation is applied to the other variables. 


Savings & Investment
EM = EM + ത 1 (b) Risky Assets (if ρ = 1 andσ 1 <σ 2 ) Risky Savings & Investment Σ = Σ EM 1 2 EM 1 / 1
ese forces can raise wealth concentration in the US economy through domestic asset price in ation in the short run, and through asymmetric portfolio rebalancing in the long run. e core model in Section 2 con rmed theses channels when the supply of assets is perfectly elastic. is section provides microfoundation for the change. To quantitatively measure the e ect on wealth inequality with this general equilibrium setup, one needs to turn to numerical simulations. We will revisit this in Section 5.


FDI Liberalization

In this subsection, I brie y show that FDI provides an additional driver for wealth concentration in the US as it further expands risky investment opportunities available in global economy. 30 To incorporate foreign direct investment, I embed a simpli ed model of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) and Antràs et al. (2009) into my framework. A poor contracting environment in the FO gives rise to the need for US multinational rms as they serve as de facto nancial intermediary in global capital markets. e extended model has three more ingredients. (Appendix A.5 provides a more detailed explanation about the associated optimal contract problem.) First, the entrepreneur in the FO can misbehave in pursuit of private bene ts. e misbehavior lowers the expected earning from
Φ(K 2t )dt to π L Φ(K 2t )dt, where π L ∈ [0, 1).
e misbehavior gives private bene t to the FO entrepreneur. Second, the US bank can choose to to invest K F DI 2t to create a joint venture with the FO entrepreneur. As a compensation, the US bank receives a designated share of pro t. e US bank monitors the FO entrepreneur to make sure that the full pro t is reached. Finally, the remaining portion of the investment, K Local
2t ≡ K 2t − K F DI 2t
, is funded through the local bank in 30 FDI out ow of US multinational rms currently accounts for 43 percent of foreign equity holdings by American households in terms of estimated market value. (Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2017) the FO. e banks in the two economies raise funds from investors as before, which constitute the supply side of assets.

Given this extension, in Appendix A.5, I compare the three stages of nancial globalization: (i) autarky (ii) security market liberalization and (iii) FDI and security market liberalization. For each stage of nancial globalization, the equilibrium interest rates are denoted with the superscript (i), (ii), and (iii) respectively. We can then con rm that foreign direct investment provides an additional expansion of the foreign risky asset, thereby exerting an upward force on wealth concentration in the US. 
(a) s (iii) 1 > s (ii) 1 > s (i) 1 (b) (V + V F DI ) (iii) > V (iii) > V (i)
ifσ U S < ρσ F O and π L is su ciently small. Furthermore, the US becomes the exporter of safe assets, and the net importer of the foreign portfolio and direct investment assets.

Proof. See Appendix A.5. e intuition for Proposition 4 is as follows. Even a er the global security markets are liberalized, the FO entrepreneur still has limited ability to raise funds due to their low pledgeability (i.e., π L < 1). Investment in the FO is more limited than investment in the US. What FDI does is to let the US bank become the parent company and monitors the FO subsidiary. By doing so, the joint venture opens up the full potential of investment in the FO. e investment in the FO is essentially riskier than the investment in the US. us, a higher value of s 1 is required when both FDI and security markets are liberalized, to induce US households to bear more risks and clear the markets. e US bank gains an additional excess pro t, in the form of V F DI dt.


Cross-country implications

One implication of the model is that nancial globalization increases wealth concentration most prominently within a nancially-developed economy (at least in the short run) by changing the country's equilibrium interest rates. Two channels have been discussed: domestic asset price ination in the short run and portfolio reallocation in the long run. By shedding light on the global nance architecture, the model o ers a novel argument for why the U.S. has experienced a particularly large increase in wealth concentration among developed economies. e US economy is o en quoted as the world's banker due to its special role in international nancial markets. e model suggests that the country's special function would have played a central role in transforming domestic interest rates, thereby increasing wealth inequality among American households.

By contrast, in peripheral economies, the e ect depends on speci c circumstances. First, suppose that FDI is shut o and the foreign risky asset is a perfect substitute for the domestic risky asset. In this case, whatever happens in the US, the opposite will happen in the FO. Second, if the foreign and domestic risky assets provide diversi cation bene ts for each other, US and FO will both experience the heterogeneous portfolio rebalancing between the rich and the poor. Finally, wealth inequality can be increased in the both regions if FDI plays the most signi cant role in the process of nancial globalization. is is because the liberalization of FDI can expand risky investment opportunities not only for advanced economies but also for emerging markets.

Remark 2: Integration of symmetric countries While capital ow between the central and peripheral economies is an important theme of international nance, the integration of identical countries (as in Obstfeld (1994)) is also a good thought-experiment for obtaining a clearer insight. e only driver for global nancial ows in this case is the diversi cation bene t. Proposition 3(ii) implies that the risk premium of the US domestic risky asset falls, thereby generating capital gains for rich households. is is followed by the heterogeneous portfolio rebalancing between the rich and the poor, which o sets a part of the decline in return on the US domestic assets. A lower value of ρ makes the two e ects cancel each other more strongly. Yet it is easy to show that, in this case, the decline-in-return e ect always dominates the rebalancing e ect. For a persistent increase in wealth inequality, we need an extra-driver such as the asymmetry between the US and peripheral economies.


Taking the Model to the Data

In this section, I assess whether global nancial ows between the central and peripheral economies is likely to be an important factor behind the observed increase in US wealth inequality. I also examine the extent to which the current increase in US wealth concentration can persist in the future.

e quantitative analysis proceeds in three steps. First, I extend the baseline model by adding new ingredients, such as labor income and housing wealth. Second, I present the target moments of the model and estimates for the key variables. Lastly, I present results.


antitative Extension

In the extended model, the lifetime utility of households born at time τ is given by
E τ ∞ τ e −(δ+m)t u(c it )dt(16)
We can write the the associated budget constraint as, in the case of autarky,
da it = [(r * t + θ 1it σs * t + m)a it + w * t l it (i) Labor Income −c it + r h t h it (ii) Housing Return )dt + σ 1 θ 1it a it dz 1t
where w * t denotes wage, l it labor productivity of household i, h it the value of housing endowment, and r h t return on housing assets. Individual wealth is de ned as the sum of net nancial assets and non-nancial assets i.e. a it + h it .

Since my main focus is to investigate the e ect of nancial globalization, modeling ingredients other than nancial assets are simpli ed or taken from previous works in the heterogeneous agent literature. First, I assume that labor productivity consists of two elements: l it ≡ i + it . Here, i represents permanent skill, which is drawn from a lognormal distribution when a household is born. e temporary shock it follows an AR(1) process d it = −β it + q it dJ it . e process dri s towards zero at rate β and jumps arrive at a Poisson arrival rate ζ . When a jump occurs q it is drawn from N (µ , σ 2 ). e p.d.f. of the normal distribution is denoted by φ( ). is setuplong-run and short-run components -is in line with previous works such as  and ts well with the actual earning processes in the data.

Second, I simplify the housing problem by assuming that h it ≡ β h1 a it + β h2 . at is, home ownership is a function of the expected life-time labor income. β h1 and β h1 will be calibrated to t the data. Essentially, housing plays a passive role in the modelr h t is exogenously taken from the data and remains una ected by nancial globalization. Housing is incorporated only to calibrate the size of the main e ect. Finally, I use the standard functional forms:
Utility : u(c it ) = (c it − κ) 1−γ − 1 1 − γ Technology : Φ(K t ) = Z K α t L 1−α t Endowment: log a i0 log i ∼ N µ a µ , Σ aa Σ a Σ a Σ
where L t ≡ [0,1] l it di is the total labor that is shared by a measure 1 of rms. Let g t (a, , ε) denote a probability density function of households whose asset level is given by a, skill by and temporary earning shock by ε. g 0 (a 0i , , ) represents a probability distribution of newborn households. e last line implies that g 0 (a 0i , , )d is a bivariate lognormal distribution.

Under this setup, I follow methodologies developed in heterogeneous-agent macroeconomics. 31 Transitional dynamics of the economy is characterized by a system of two di erential equations: the rst component is o en called the Hamiltonian-Jacobian-Bellman equation, which governs households' saving decisions. Households' saving decisions depend upon g t as well as individual state variables (a it , i , ε it ). 
(δ + m)J t = max c,θ 1 u(c) + ∂J t ∂a v t (a, , ) + 1 2 ∂ 2 J t ∂a 2 (σ 1 θ 1 a) 2 + ∂J t ∂ (−β s it ) + ζ ∞ −∞ (J t (a, , x) − J t (a, , ))φ(x)dx + 1 dt E t [dJ t ] (1.HJB) d dt g t (a, , ) = −mg t (a, , ) + mg 0 (a, , ε) − d da [v t (a, , )g t (a, , )] − ζg t (a, , ) + ζφ( ) ∞ −∞ g t (a, , x)dxd (2.Kolmogorov)
along with the market clearing conditions. Here, v t (a, , ε) represents the saving function, 32 and
1 dt E t [dJ t ] is short-hand notation for lim s 0 E t [J t+s − J s ]/s.
We consider a shock in which US makes a transition from nancial autarky to open economy from period T onwards. e aim is to quantify the e ect on the wealth distribution. Consider two economies, US and FO. As in the baseline model, the only di erences between the two economies are their banking technology, λ U S > λ F O , and output volatility,σ U S <σ F O .


Numerical Method

I use the di erential equations in Proposition 5 to derive transitional dynamics of the wealth distribution. e core challenge in numerically solving these equations is that households' saving decision depends on a realization of the cross-sectional distribution g t (a, , ε), which is an in nitely dimensional object. One should reduce the dimensionality of the state variable space 31 32 In autarky, v t = (r * t + θ 1it σ 1 s * 1t + m)a it + w * 1t l it − c it + r h t h it to solve the model. A bounded rationality assumption is one of the solutions to this problem (Krusell and Smith 1998) and has been used widely in the literature. In a similar light, I impose a restriction on households' decision makings regarding portfolio choices.

Assumption 1. In autarky, the functional form of households' portfolio choice, θ 1it , is given by
θ 1it = s 1t χ 1 σ 1 1 − χ 2 a it − χ 3 a it i(17)
where χ 1 , χ 2 , and χ 3 are constants calibrated from data. In open economy, s 1 σ 1 is replaced with Σ −1 [σ 1 s 1 ; σ 2 s 2 ]. ose whose wealth levels are below
χ 2 + χ 3 i have θ it = 0.
It is worth noting that the above functional form is an approximation to the actual endogenous portfolio choice by households. In the baseline model, this approximation was exact: χ 1 equals the risk-aversion parameter, χ 2 equals a and χ 3 equals 0.

is is what (3) indicates in Section 2. 33 e portfolio weight in the full quantitative model deviates from this closed-form solution as it embodies labor income. Instead of solving it numerically, I simplify the interaction between labor income and portfolio choice as described by (17)  ere are two advantages of Assumption 1. First, the dimension of the state variables that determine the current equilibrium prices is reduced dramatically; all equilibrium prices, r t , s 1t , s 2t and w t , are now expressed as a function of a nite number of state variables thanks to its nice aggregation property. One way to see the aggregation property is to look at the total demand for risky assets. For example, in a closed economy where all households have a it ≥ χ 2 + χ 3 i (the baseline model was one of these cases), it is easy to show
i a it θ 1it di = s 1t χ 1 σ 1 A 1t − χ 2 − χ 3 i 1 i di where A 1t denotes i a U S it di.
Essentially, the mean of the wealth distribution, instead of the entire distribution, acts as a su cient statistics for the demand for the risky asset in autarky. Other market clearing conditions are also simpli ed. (See Appendix C) Second, the t of θ 1it + θ 2it to the data is good. Assumption 1 has properties consistent with the fact that (i) wealthier households invest more heavily in equity; (ii) the marginal increase in investment share in equity is diminishing in wealth; and (iii) the investment share in equity converges to an upper bound as the wealth level rises. I con rm these in the later section.

In light of this property, I run a continuous-time analogue of Krusell and Smith (1998). I begin with a guess for the law of motion for the state variable, 34 which is now presumed to be A 1t in autarky.

rough simulations, I verify that the proposed motion is indeed consistent with the model's predictions. e algorithm proceeds in four steps. (Step 1) Guess the law of motion for the state variable. In actual practice, d log A 1t = (ψ 1 − 1) log A 1t + ψ 2 works well in autarky. Begin by guessing ψ 1 and ψ 2 (Step 2) Under this law of motion, numerically solve the HJB equation and compute individual saving decisions.

(

Step 3) Using these saving decisions, compute the evolution of the wealth distribution.

(

Step 4) Verify that the proposed law of motion is indeed consistent with Step 3. Return to Step 1 if not consistent.

More detailed explanations about the algorithm, especially when there is household debt, are referred to Appendix C. 35 


Calibration Strategy

Notable target moments Given this setup, I calibrate the model to t data. I use year 1989 as the benchmark year for nancial autarky due to data availability. 36 Among other parameters, the ones below deserve further comments.
λ U S ,σ U S , λ F O ,σ F O , ρ; µ a , Σ aa , Σ al
First, I choose {λ U S ,σ U S , λ F O ,σ F O , ρ} to adjust the equilibrium portfolio frontier in autarky and in open economy, {r * t , s * 1t , r t , s 1t , s 2t }, to fall within a reasonable range according to the historical pa erns I will explain below. Next, I pick the values of µ a , Σ aa , and Σ al to match the modelimplied stationary wealth distribution with the actual wealth distribution in 1989 reported in the Survey of Consumer Finances. e target moments are the top 1%, the top 5% and the bo om 90% wealth shares. 34 As in Krusell and Smith (1998), one implicit assumption is that only a nite moments of the wealth distribution ma er in the law of motion for the state variables, and thus for the future equilibrium prices. 35  . Compared with their works, the numerical approach here provides more transparent interpretations about the law of motion for the state variable (rather than leaving it as a black box). But the range of applications is limited to wealth inequality problems as this framework cannot incorporate TFP shocks. 36 Since 1989, the Federal Reserve has provided Survey of Consumer Finances that are consistent across years. ( e earlier surveys are less comparable.) e data moments, such as top wealth and wage shares, are taken from these datasets. Alternatively, one can look at tax-based estimates on top wealth and wage shares, which allows researchers to trace back to older data series.

One consideration is to generate a modest size of risk premium. It has been well known that the standard neoclassical model performs poorly in matching the risk premium in the data. is paper is no exception. My model has three features that help reconcile this issue partially. First, many households do not own risky assets. Households whose wealth and labor productivity fall short of a threshold in (17) take on debt. By reducing the demand for risky assets and increasing the supply of safe assets, the model-implied risk premium takes on a higher value. e mechanism is similar to Mankiw and Zeldes (1991). Second, χ 1 in (17) can be set di erently from the elasticity of intertemporal substitution implied by utility function. My model has one more degree of freedom to inhibit investment on the risky assets. Finally, I leaveσ U S andσ F O as free parameters to match the Sharpe ratios.

Estimation of the interest rates To discipline the model, we investigate a change in the risk-free interest rate, capital gains, and the Sharpe ratio of US domestic and foreign assets. I perform the estimation in two steps. First, I use national accounts data to construct a time series of average realized returns on various asset classes in the U.S. economy. Following Saez and Zucman (2016), 37 I compute a macroeconomic yield of each asset class by dividing the ow payment reported in Gross National Income by the market value reported in the Fed's Financial Accounts. In the case of equities, for instance, the average dividend yield in 2005 is de ned as the ratio between the total dividend paid to households during 2005 and the total value of equity holdings at the end of 2004. I then compute capital gains as an increase in the market value that exceeds the net issuance of equities during the year. Finally, the average return on equities is measured as the average dividend yield plus the average rate of capital gain. A similar methodology can be applied to other asset classes such as xed income assets, housing and non-corporate business, and also to sub-asset classes such as foreign equity. 38 Panel (a) of Figure 5 displays the average realized returns on equities, xed income and 3month treasury bills in the United States, smoothed over twenty years to eliminate cyclical variations. Each line represents the geometric average of real returns over a twenty-year horizon centered on the x coordinate. What this graph shows is that the average real returns on safe assets have been declining over the past decades, which many studies (e.g. Caballero et al. 2008, Mendoza et al. 2009) associated with the foreign demand for US safe assets. On the other hand, the realized return on equities began to diverge substantially from other safe assets since 1980s as we smooth out the cyclical variation. Fixed income assets exhibit a similar pa ern. We should investigate these pa erns with care as the realized returns on long-term assets are jointly a ected 37 is method has been used in many contexts including Mian   a change in the discount rate and expected cash ows. e next step of the analysis is to estimate capital gains, expected returns and Sharpe ratio so that we can examine how nancial globalization has increased the relative reward for holding risky assets. To this end, I employ a simple estimation method proposed by Fama and French (2002), Campbell (2008) and Campbell and ompson (2008). e central idea is that fundamentals such as dividends, earnings and pro tability can be used for estimating ex ante Notes: Some of the series are not available during 1951-1981 due to the data constraint. r f t is the real return on 3 month treasury bills rolled over at each quarter, GD t is the dividend growth rate, GE t is the earning growth rate, and RoE t is accounting return on equity for year t. All variables are measured in real terms and expressed as percents. expected stock returns. e simplest form of these, for example, is dividend yield plus expected dividend growth rate. See Appendix D.1 for more details about these estimation methods Panel (b) and (c) of Figure 5 suggest that a substantial portion of realized returns on equities can stem from cumulative capital gains over the past decades. In panel (b), the shaded area displays the gap between realized returns on equities and 3-month treasury bills smoothed over twenty years. Some portion of it could be accounted for by the equity premium. e 20-year smoothed equity premium is indicated by the solid line. e upper part of the blue area above the lines therefore indicates the average rate of capital gains.

In Panel (c), I present the 20-year moving averages of capital gains implied by the three different estimations. Regardless of which method I choose, the estimated capital gains account for a signi cant part of realized returns. is is what the baseline model predicts: as the required expected return on assets has fallen and excess pro ts have increased, possibly due to globalization, the overall price of equities rises as a consequence of revaluation gains. is is also consistent with the view of Fama and French (2002), who claim that a signi cant part of the post-war realized returns on the stock index appear to have come from a large capital gain.

Furthermore, panel (d) of Figure 5 provides evidence that the expansion of foreign investment opportunities helped increase the Sharpe ratio of U.S. households' portfolio. I compare two equity portfolio, mixed and domestic, indicated by the blue and red bars in Panel (d). e mixed portfolio represents the actual portfolio owned by U.S. households. e underlying dividends and earnings originate from foreign entities as well as domestic rms, which are reported in Gross National Income. On the other hand, the domestic portfolio is based solely on pro ts generated by domestic investment and therefore reported in Gross Domestic Product. I use estimated market values, dividends, earnings and other fundamentals reported in Fed's Financial Account.

As in Fama and French (2002), I measure the Sharpe ratio of each aggregate portfolio as the estimated risk premium over the sample standard deviation of the realized returns. e blue and red bars present the estimated Sharpe ratios based on the three approaches. e sample period in this exercise is restricted to 1982-2017 due to the data constraint. Panel (d) shows that, indeed, the U.S. households enjoy a higher risk-return trade-o than the one generated in the U.S. domestic sectors. is bene t stems from a higher return on global investment and diversi cation e ect. Table 2 provides related statistics. 6 antitative Analysis Table 3 presents the calibrated parameters and their target moments. Figure 6 displays the t of the model. First, the model is able to generate a Pareto tail in the wealth distribution and the top wealth shares are generally in line with the estimated top wealth share in 1989. Second, the model can match wage inequality and take into account its e ect on the top wealth share. Later on, I compare the contribution of nancial globalization with that of rising wage inequality. Finally, we can check portfolio choices of di erent wealth holders as shown in Panel (e) and (f). A uent households invest more heavily on equity whereas the middle class invest more heavily on safe assets and housing.


Model Fit


Result 1: Transitional Dynamics

Panel (a) and (b) in Figure 7 plot transitional dynamics of the US wealth distribution a er global capital ows transform interest rates and portfolio frontier in the economy. ese gures con rm the basic logic developed in Section 2. A er global capital ows are liberalized, low discount factors lead to capital gains of long-term assets in the nancial center country. As can be seen from the gure, indebted households increase their debt level while the upper tail of the wealth distribution becomes thicker. e Pareto exponent of the distribution has increased. Panel (c) and Panel (d) illustrate portfolio shi ing behaviors. ese diagrams show that, even in a numerical  simulation, capital return inequality is widened thanks to a higher slope of the capital allocation line. is portfolio rebalancing e ect helps counteract the decline in return on the domestic assets. A higher Sharpe ratio provides incentives for rich households to increase investment share in the risky assets. Table 4 presents quantitative magnitude of these e ects. Over the 30 years, the model generates a 4.8%p increase in the top one percent wealth share. is accounts for 55% = 4.8%p 8.7%p of the observed increase in the top one percent wealth share in the Survey of Consumer Finances. If one uses estimates from Saez and Zucman (2016), the calibrated model accounts for 34% = 4.8%p

14.1%p of the increase in the wealth share. e transitional dynamics can be divided into two steps. Immediately a er the globalization shock, the top one percent's wealth share is increased from 0.312 to 0.327 due to capital gains on the existing domestic risky asset. e asymmetric portfolio rebalancing arises, thereby generating a gradual increase in wealth concentration. In the new stationary state, the top wealth share is increased as large as to 0.405.


Result 2: Reversal of the Trend

A core message of this study is that the long-run trajectory of wealth concentration on the relative magnitudes of (a) the decrease in domestic interest rates and (b) the asymmetric balance sheet reallocation across di erent wealth holders. e previous analysis suggests that, at least over the past three decades, the e ect from (b) appears to outweigh the e ect from (a). As in Section 2, the model still leaves room for a possible reversal in the future if nancial globalization  no longer provides enough diversi cation bene t to counteract diminished return on domestic assets. Figure 8 presents one such case. In this exercise, Financial globalization is modeled as two-stage shocks. e rst wave of nancial globalization is the same as before. In the second wave, the Sharpe ratio of the optimal portfolio is reduced due to a decrease inσ F O . ese shocks, as Panel (b) shows, result in an inverse-U shape transitional dynamics of the top one percent wealth share. 


Result 3: Factor Decomposition

Next, we explore di erent factors that could potentially contribute to rising wealth concentration in the U.S. over the past three decades. Several factors have been proposed to account for the recent change in the wealth distribution in the U.S., including widened wage inequality and tax reforms. In this subsection, we compare the magnitudes of these e ects and assess the extent to which global capital ows ma er to changes in the U.S. wealth distribution from 1989 to 2016. e exercise proceeds as follows. In the rst scenario, I consider a situation where the economy experiences an increase in wage inequality, with every other parameter held constant. e widened wage inequality is simply captured by an change in the value of Σ ll . I adjust µ l to make sure that the total labor supply remains unchanged. ese parameters are calibrated such thatprior to the shock --the implied top wage shares are consistent with the observed shares in 1989. e post-shock wage distribution is matched to the 2016 data. In the second scenario, I assume that global capital ows are the only structural change over this period with all else staying the same. is scenario is identical to the one presented in Section 6.2. I also analyze the combined e ect between the two factors. Finally, I compute residuals -the portion that is not accounted for by these two factors. I interpret the size of these residuals as the extent to which other factors such as changing taxes contributed to rising wealth concentration.   By contrast, global nancial ows make a more immediate and sizable impact on the wealth distribution. Global capital ows alone can explain a 4.8%p increase in the top 1% wealth share out of 7.4%p and a -6.8%p decrease in the bo om 90% wealth share out of -12.2%p. Figure 9 plots the related transitional dynamics. e quantitative analysis here suggests that global capital ows play an outsized role in reshaping the wealth distribution of the U.S. -the central country in global nancial architecture.


Conclusion

Financial globalization was an important milestone for the US capital market. e US economy has experienced a dramatic increase in capital ows over the past decades, yet the expansion of external balance sheet was asymmetric, owing to the country's special role in the global nancial system. On the one hand, American investors gained new access to high-yield risky assets in the form of global equity, and FDI of US multinational rms. On the other hand, an increasingly large proportion of US debt securities is being held by foreign investors seeking safe returns.

is paper developed a model to quantify the contribution of nancial globalization to rising wealth concentration in the US. I showed that capital account liberalization around the globe can change the market value of net worth for American households and reshape the way their wealth is subsequently reinvested.

antitatively, about one-third to one-half of the increase in the top one percent's wealth share could potentially be accounted for by global nancial ows between the nancial center and peripheral economies. At the same time, the model indicates that a future trajectory of wealth concentration is dependent on the relative magnitudes of the drop in domestic interest rates and the expansion of new risky assets. Declining yields of global and US domestic assets in recent periods suggest that a reversal of the trend in rising wealth inequality is not impossible in the future.

Studying the international dimension of capital market would help us understand the evolution of the wealth distribution and to design distribution policies. is paper takes one step, but the following areas deserve further investigation: First, there is still a computational di culty in modeling asset prices with heterogeneous agents at a large scale. is paper is no exception, though I provide leeway applicable to a medium-scale model. e literature has room for improvement. Second, I simplify the linkage between housing markets and global nancial ows.

ird, no active tax policy is explored in this paper. I leave these topics for future research. e denominator is the average net worth of the entire population. Recall that all households retain their wealth above a, so no mass exists below this threshold. Multiplying r + σ 1 s 1 and taking log, one can obtain
log Ω T = log ∞ a=G * −1 (0.99) {a(1 − θ 1 (a))(r + σ 1 s 1 ) + aθ 1 (a) (r * + σ 1 s * 1 )} g * (a)da − log ∞ a=a {a(1 − θ 1 (a))(r + σ 1 s 1 ) + aθ 1 (a) (r * + σ 1 s * 1 )} g * (a)da
Di erentiating the both sides with respect to x ≡ r + σ 1 s 1 , we have
d log Ω T = −φ 1 d(r + σ 1 s 1 ) r + σ 1 s 1 = −φ 1 d log(r + σ 1 s 1 ) where φ 1 = − (r + σ 1 s 1 ) ∞ a=G * −1 (0.99) {a(1 − θ 1 (a))} g * (a)da ∞ a=G * −1 (0.99) {a(1 − θ 1 (a))(r + σ 1 s 1 ) + aθ 1 (a) (r * + σ 1 s * 1 )} g * (a)da + (r + σ 1 s 1 ) ∞ a=a {a(1 − θ 1 (a))} g * (a)da ∞ a=a {a(1 − θ 1 (a))(r + σ 1 s 1 ) + aθ 1 (a) (r * + σ 1 s * 1 )} g * (a)da
Dividing each term by its numerator, we can re-write φ 1 as is proves the rst part of the proposition. Intuitively speaking, the top 1 percent households, on average, invest more heavily in risky assets prior to the shock so they get more revaluation gains than the average population.
Lemma 1. d dx ∞ x aθ 1 (a)g * (a)da ∞ x a(1−θ 1 (a))g * (a)da > 0 for all x ≥ a.
Proof. It is easy to show . Taking a derivative with respect to x, we obtain
1 ∞ x ag * (a) 2 −xθ 1 (x)g * (x) a x ag * (a)da + xg * (x) a x aθ 1 (a)g * (a)da = xg * (x)θ 1 (x) ∞ x ag * (a) 2 − a x ag * (a)da + a x a θ 1 (a) θ 1 (x) g * (a)da >0
where the last inequality results from θ 1 (a) θ 1 (x) > 1 for all a ≥ x.


A.1.2 Result 2. d log Ω ∞

Next, let me turn to Ω ∞ . Let g(a) denote the stationary distribution in closed economy. Substituting c(a) and θ 1 (a) from (3), the Kolmogorov Forward equation in (5) can be expressed as
0 = −mg 0 (a) + mg(a) + d da (r * + (s * 1 ) 2 − δ)(a − a)g(a)
Arranging the terms, one can restate the di erential equation as
dg(a) da + r * + (s * 1 ) 2 − δ + m r * + (s * 1 ) 2 − δ g(a) a − a = mg 0 (a) (r * + (s * 1 ) 2 − δ)(a − a)
Multiplying the both sides by (a − a) r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ+m r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ , we have
d da g(a)(a − a) r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ+m r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ = (a − a) r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ+m r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ −1 mg 0 (a) (r * + (s * 1 ) 2 − δ)
Taking an integral in terms of a, we can obtain
g(a) = a a (x − a) r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ+m r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ mg 0 (x) r * + (s * 1 ) 2 − δ dx + C (a − a) − r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ+m r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ
where C is the constant of integration. C is pinned down by the condition ∞ a g(a)da = 1. Recall that every k'th moment of g 0 is nite by assumption, so the limit of the rst term in the bracket is nite. at is, 
θ 1it θ 2it = Σ −1 σ 1 s 1 σ 2 s 2 1 − a a it(18)
where Σ ≡ [σ 2 1 , ρσ 1 σ 2 ; ρσ 1 σ 2 , σ 2 2 ] is the variance-covariance matrix.

Proof. See Appendix B.1.2.

Lemma 2 implies that the relative portfolio weight between the two risky assets are given by
Σ −1 σ 1 s 1 σ 2 s 2 = 1 1 − ρ 2 s 1 σ 1 − ρs 2 σ 1 s 2 σ 1 − ρs 1 σ 1
Again, we only consider cases where the optimal choices of θ 1it and θ 2it are non-negative. e formula above shows that a su cient and necessary condition for this is
ρ < min s 1 s 2 , s 2 s 1(19)
We take this condition as given. Substituting θ it from (18) into the Kolmogorov Forward equation, we can obtain
mg(a) + d da (r + R Σ −1 R − δ)(a − a)g(a) = mg 0 (a)
where R = [σ 1 s 1 ; σ 2 s 2 ]. We can then solve for the stationary wealth distribution by following the same procedure as in closed economy. e Pareto exponent in open economy is given by
1 ξ = r + R Σ −1 R − δ m = r + 1 1−ρ 2 (s 2 1 − 2ρs 1 s 2 + s 2 2 ) − δ m Totally di erentiating Ω ∞ = 100 1 ξ −1 , we have d log Ω ∞ = φ 2 d log(r + σ 1 s 1 ) + φ 3 d log s 2 − φ 4 d log ρ where φ 2 = (r + σ 1 s 1 ) log 100 m > 0 φ 3 = 2s 2 log 100 m(1 − ρ 2 ) (s 2 − ρs 1 ) > 0 φ 4 = 2ρ log 100 m(1 − ρ 2 ) 2 ρ 2 s 1 s 2 − ρ(s 2 1 + s 2 2 ) + s 1 s 2 > 0
e second inequality results from (19). e last inequality follows from
−ρ(s 2 1 + s 2 2 ) + s 1 s 2 = s 1 s 2 ρ − s 1 s 2 − s 2 s 1 + 1 ρ > 0
in view of the condition in (19).


A.2 More Details on Dynamics

As time passes by, wealth stock grows and the stationary state level of wealth is a ected by various technological parameters. Let me rst de ne the stationary state of this economy. By plugging θ 1it = s * 1t σ 1 1 − a a it and c it = (δ + m)a it + (r * t − δ − m)a into the households' budget constraint, integrating them with i and incorporating the overlapping generation structure, we can derive the evolution of wealth stock A t as follows
dA t = (r * (A t ) + s * 1 (A t ) 2 − δ − m)(A t − a) + m(A t − A 0 ) dt + s * 1 (A t )A t dz(20)
where r(·) and s(·) are the solutions given by (14) and (15), and A 0 is the mean wealth of newborn households. Let A s denote the stock of wealth such that E t [dA t ] = 0 and A s > a. One can interpret A s as the stationary state level of wealth stock in that the expected growth rate is zero. e next proposition states that this feature does li le to alter Proposition 2 when a is small.


Corollary 2.

In the stationary state, a developing country exhibits a smaller wealth stock A s , a lower risk-free rate r * (A s ), and a higher Sharpe ratio s * 1 (A s ), a lower cost of capital r * (A s ) +σs * 1 (A s ) and a lower excess pro t V * (A s ) when a = 0


A.3 Proof of Collorary 2

As we discussed in the dra , A t evolves according to a stochastic process
dA t = (r(A t ) + s 1 (A t ) 2 − δ − m)(A t − a) + m(A t − A 0 ) dt + s 1 (A t )A t dz where s 1 (A) =σA/(A − a)(21)r(A) = Φ (A) −σ 2 A/(A − a) − τ + τ λ(22)
e stationary wealth stock, A s , is pinned down by
r(A s ) + s(A s ) 2 = δ + m + m(A t − A 0 ) A t − a
Substituting r(A) and s 1 (A) from (21) and (22), one can obtain
Φ (A s ) +σ 2 A s A s − a 2 − A s A s − a − τ + τ λ = δ + m + m(A s − A 0 ) A s − a
Consider the case where a = 0. One can then write the above expression as Φ (A s ) − τ + τ λ = 2m + δ − mA 0 A s e le -hand side is decreasing in A s , while the right-hand side is increasing in A s . So A s is uniquely pinned down by this condition. Invoking the Implicit Function eorem, we have
Φ (A s ) − mA 0 (A s ) 2 ∂A s ∂λ + τ = 0
which leads to ∂A s ∂λ > 0 due to diminishing marginal return. erefore, FO has a lower A s in autarky. For other variables, it is easy to show that s 1 (A) =σ is increasing inσ and that r(A s ) = −σ 2 − τ + τ λ is decreasing inσ and increasing in λ. So FO has a higher s 1 and a lower r. Finally, the cost of capital. r(A s ) +σ 1 s(A s ) + τ − τ λ = Φ (A s ), is higher in a developing country as well. is leads to lower excess pro ts, V 1t .


A.4 Proof of Proposition 3

A.4.1 Case 1. ρ ∈ (0, 1) Suppose that ρ < 1. In Appendix B.2.2, I show that the portfolio choice functions can be wri en as
θ 1it θ 2it = Σ −1 σ 1 s 1t σ 2 s 2t 1 − a a it
and the market clearing conditions are
r t = Φ (K 1t ) −σ 1 s 1t − τ (1 − λ 1 )(23)r t = Φ (K 2t ) −σ 2 s 2t − τ (1 − λ 2 ) (24) K 1t = (s 1t − ρs 2t ) σ 1 (1 − ρ 2 ) (2A − a 1 − a 2 )(25)K 2t = (s 2t − ρs 1t ) σ 2 (1 − ρ 2 ) (2A − a 1 − a 2 )(26)K 1t + K 2t = 2A(27)
conditional on A 1t = A 2t = A. Using the system of equations, (25) and (26), we can solve for s 1t as follows
s 1t ≡σ 1 K 1t + ρσ 2 K 2t 2A − a 1 − a 2
Substituting K 1t from (27), one can write the above formula as
s 1t =σ 1 2A − (1 − ρσ 2 /σ 1 )K 2t 2A − a 1 − a 2(28)
Since ρσ 2 >σ 1 , we have
s 1t =σ 1 2A − (1 − ρσ 2 /σ 1 )K 2t 2A − a 1 − a 2 >σ 1 2A 2A − (a 1 + a 2 ) >σ 1 A A − a 1 = s * 1t
where the second inequality results from a 1 < a 2 .

Next, I compare between r t and r * t conditional on the realization of A 1t = A 2t = A. To show that the risk-free interest in nancial center country rises a er global integration, rst note that
Φ −1 (r * t +σ 1 s * 1t + τ (1 − λ 1 )) = A(29)
Suppose now, to get a contradiction, r t ≥ r * t . I already showed s 1t > s * 1t , so one can obtain
r 1 +σ 1 s 1t + τ (1 − λ 1 ) > r * 1 +σ 1 s * 1t + τ (1 − λ 1 )
Using the rst order condition (29) and Φ (·) < 0, it is now straightforward to see that K 1t < A. is leads to K 2t > A due to (27). We can then obtain
Φ (K 1t ) > Φ (K 2t ) ⇔ r t +σ 1 s 1t + τ (1 − λ 1 ) > r t +σ 2 s 2t + τ (1 − λ 2 ) ⇔σ 2 s 2t <σ 1 s 1t − τ (λ 1 − λ 2 )
in view of (23) and (24). Subtracting ρσ 2 s 1t from the both sides of the last inequality, we havē
σ 2 (s 2t − ρs 1t ) <σ 1 s 1t − ρσ 2 s 1t − τ (λ 1 − λ 2 )
< 0 e last inequality follows from ρσ 2 >σ 1 and λ 1 > λ 2 . is inequality is a contradiction to
K 2t > A because it implies K 2t = (s 2t − ρs 1t ) σ 2 (1 − ρ 2 ) (2A − a 1 − a 2 ) < 0(30)
in equilibrium. us, r t < r * t must hold when A 1t = A 2t = A is given. Finally, I turn to proving r t +σ 1 s 1t < r * t +σ 1 s * 1t and V 1t > V * 1t . e rst inequality is straightforward to prove because
r t +σ 1 s 1t = Φ (K 1t ) − τ (1 − λ 1 ) < Φ (A) − τ (1 − λ 1 ) = r * t +σ 1 s * 1t
e line equality follow from (23). e second line results from K 1t > A; recall from (30) that assuming K 1t < A leads to a contradiction as it implies K 1t < A < K 2t . e nal line is due to (29). Since the cost of capital becomes lower a er nancial globalization, excess pro ts to entrepreneurs rise i.e. V 1t > V * 1t . is inequality can be analytically proved by applying the Envelope theorem to the rm's pro t maximization problem. More speci cally, we can write its objective function as
V 1t ≡ max K 1t ,D 1t ,E 1t Φ(K 1t ) − r t D 1t − (r * t + σ 1 s * 1t + τ )E 1t + Λ 1 (K 1t − D 1t − E 1t ) + Λ 2 (λK 1t − D 1t )
where Λ 1 and Λ 2 are the Lagrangian multipliers. Also, recall σ 1 =σ 1 1−λ . So we can restate the problem as
V 1t = max K 1t Φ(K 1t ) − (r t +σ 1 s 1t )K 1t
Given that the rm is a price taker, let x ≡ r t +σs 1t . Invoking the Envelope eorem, we have dV 1t dx < 0 for all x. us, we can see that V 1t > V * 1t .

A.4.2 Case 2. ρ = 1

Now let me turn to the limit case where ρ = 1. While the risks per unit of equity are di erent (i.e. σ 1 =σ 1 1−λ 1 and σ 2 =σ 2 1−λ 2 ), domestic and foreign risky assets provide identical stochastic returns up to normalization. Essentially, foreign risky assets act as perfect substitutes to domestic risky assets. A single price clears the market for risky assets. I shall use s t ≡ s 1t = s 2t to denote the common Sharpe ratio. Conditional on the realization of A 1t = A 2t = A, one can write the market clearing conditions as
r t = Φ (K 1t ) −σ 1 s t − τ (1 − λ 1 )(31)r t = Φ (K 2t ) −σ 2 s t − τ (1 − λ 2 )(32)(2A − a 1 − a 2 )s t =σ 1 K 1t +σ 2 K 2t(33)2A = K 1t + K 2t(34)
Note here that (25) and (26) are now replaced by (33), which consists of the supply and demand functions for risky assets. e le -hand side of (33) represents the total aggregate amount of risks borne by households, while the right-hand represents the total aggregate amount of risks generated by domestic and foreign rms. In fact, we can rewrite condition (33) as
s t = ω 1σ1 + ω 2σ2 1 − (a 1 + a 2 )/(2A) where ω 1 ≡ K 1t 2A and ω 2 ≡ K 2t
2A . e sum of ω 1 and ω 2 equals 1 due to (34). It is then straightforward to see that
s t = ω 1σ1 + ω 2σ2 1 − (a 1 + a 2 )/(2A) >σ 1 1 − a 1 /A 1t = s * t sinceσ 2 >σ 1 and a 1 < a 2 . is proves s t > s * t .
Moving on, it follows from (31) and (32) that
K 1t > K 2t . is implies that K 1t > A so one obtains Φ(K 1t ) > Φ(A) ⇔ r t +σ 1 s t + τ (1 − λ 1 ) < r * t +σ 1 s * t + τ (1 − λ 1 ) ⇔ r t +σ 1 s t < r * t +σ 1 s * t
Combined with s 1t > s * 1t , this leads to r t < r * t . Also, invoking the Envelope eorem as before, one can obtain V * 1t < V 1t when A 1t = A 2t = A is given.


A.5 More Details on Foreign Direct Investment

Pu ing all the ingredients in Section 4.2 together, we can state the US rm's problem as maximizing the pro t V 1t + V F DI 1t generated in the two countries. V 1t is domestic excess pro t de ned in (11), while V F DI 1t stems from the optimal contract problem:
V F DI 1t dt ≡ max {φ Local ,φ F DI ,c, K Local 2t ,K F DI 2t } φ F DI Φ(K 2t ) − R 1 K F DI 2t − cΦ(K 2t ) dt(35)
subject to
K 2t = K Local 2t + K F DI 2t (36) (1 − π L )(1 − φ F DI − φ Local )Φ(K 2t ) ≥ B(η)Φ(K 2t )(37)(1 − π L )φ F DI Φ(K 2t ) ≥ ηΦ(K 2t )(38)(1 − φ Local − φ F DI )Φ(K 2t ) ≥ 0 (39) φ Local Φ(K 2t ) ≥ R 2 K Local 2t(40)
where R 1 ≡ r t +σ 2 s 2t + τ F DI (1 − λ 1 ) and R 2 ≡ r t +σ 2 s 2t + τ (1 − λ 2 ) are funding costs per unit of capital in the US and FO respectively. Under this contract, the FO entrepreneur, US rm and local nancial intermediary receive (1 − φ F DI − φ Local ), φ F DI and φ Local shares of pro ts at each instantaneous time respectively.

Turning to constraints associated with the contract, the rst line represents the balance sheet of the FO rm. It has two funding sources: the U.S. parent rm, K F DI 2t , and local nancial intermediary, K Local 2t . e second condition is the incentive-compatible constraint for the FO entrepreneur. π L is the pro t loss from the misbehavior of the FO entrepreneur. Private bene ts to the entrepreneur is assumed to be B(η)Φ(K 2t ) where η is the monitoring level by the U.S. rm and B (η) < 0. 39 From the FO entrepreneur's viewpoint, increased payo s from the good behavior should be greater than the private bene t. e third condition represents incentivecompatible constraint to induce the US rm to pay a monitoring cost ηΦ(K 2t ). It implies that the bene t of monitoring should outweigh the cost. e fourth condition corresponds to the participation constraint of the FO entrepreneur. e last condition is associated with the funding cost in the FO ; the share of pro ts allocated to local nancial intermediary should be greater than or equal to the equilibrium funding cost. Local nancial intermediary breaks even.

Finally, recall that the funding cost for K F DI 2t and K Local 2t are given by R 1 dt and R 2 dt respectively and we can express them as
R 1 ≡ r t +σ 2 s 2t + τ F DI (1 − λ 1 ) R 2 ≡ r t +σ 2 s 2t + τ (1 − λ 2 )
One assumption I make here is that τ F DI > τ so as to make R 1 > R 2 arise. is condition would make local funding preferable when there were no monitoring bene t from FDI. In equilibrium, the rm chooses a mix of K local 2t and K F DI 2t to equalize the marginal bene t of FDI with its opportunity cost. As it turns out later, this structure leads to the coexistence of foreign portfolio equity and FDI in global capital ows. With this apparatus in place, open economy equilibrium is now de ned as follows:

De nition 4. An open economy equilibrium is a stochastic process, {r t , (s 1t , σ 1 ), (s 2t , σ 2 )} t≥0 , which clears global nancial markets:
k∈{F O,U S} (S k t − I k t ) = 0, k∈{F O,U S} S k 1t = I U S 1t and k∈{F O,U S} S k 2t = I F O 2t where I F O 2t = K Local 2t + K F DI 2t
. e rest is same as in Section 4.1.

A.6 Proof of Proposition 4

I take a similar approach to Antràs et al. (2009). Note here that the participation constraint of the FO entrepreneur, (39), never binds in optimal contract due to some informational rent; if it were to bind, the le -hand side of (37) would become negative so the FO entrepreneur would always shirk. We can then write the Lagrangian associated with the U.S. entrepreneur's problem as
L =φ F DI Φ(K 2t ) − R 1 K F DI 2t − ηΦ(K 2t ) + µ 1 [K Local 2t + K F DI 2t − K 2t ] + µ 2 (1 − π L )(1 − φ F DI − φ Local ) − B(η) + µ 3 [φ F DI − η/(1 − π L )] + µ 5 φ Local Φ(K 2t ) − R 2 K Local 2t
where µ k represents the Lagrangian multiplier for the k th constraint. e rst order conditions yield
∂L ∂K 2t = (φ F DI − η)Φ (K 2t ) − µ 1 + µ 5 φ Local Φ (K 2t ) = 0 (41) ∂L ∂K F DI 2t = −R 1 + µ 1 = 0 ∂L ∂K Local 2t = µ 1 − R 2 µ 5 = 0 ∂L ∂φ F DI = Φ(K 2t ) − µ 2 (1 − π L ) + µ 3 = 0 ∂L ∂φ Local = −µ 2 (1 − π L ) + µ 5 Φ(K 2t ) = 0 ∂L ∂η = −Φ(K 2t ) − µ 2 B (η) − µ 3 1 − π L = 0(42)
Merging these conditions, it is easy to show
µ 1 = R 1 > 0, µ 5 = R 1 R 2 > 0, µ 2 = R 1 R 2 Φ(K 2t ) 1 − π L > 0, µ 3 = Φ(K 2t ) R 1 R 2 − 1 > 0 (43)
where the last inequality results from the assumption I made earlier: R 1 ≡ r t +σ 2 s 2t + τ F DI (1 − λ 1 ) > r t +σ 2 s 2t + τ (1 − λ 1 ) ≡ R 2 . ese results imply that constraint (36), (37), (38), and (40) must be binding.

Next, substituting µ 2 and µ 3 from (43), one can convert condition (42) into
B (η) = − R 2 R 1 R 1 R 2 − π L < 0
which pins down the optimal value of monitoring, η, when the market funding costs are given. Also, the optimal level of investment is determined by condition (41). Substituting µ 1 and µ 5 from (43), we obtain
Φ (K 2t ) = R 1 φ F DI − η − R 1 R 2 φ Local = R 1 ηπ L 1−π L + R 1 R 2 1 − B(η)+η 1−π L(44)
Let K * 2t and η * denote the level of investment and monitoring determined by these conditions. e rest of control variables are pinned down by the constraints as follows
φ F DI * = η * 1 − π L (45) φ Local * = 1 − B(η * ) + η * 1 − π L (46) K Local * 2t = φ Local * Φ(K * 2t ) R 2 (47) K F DI * 2t = K * 2t − K Local * 2t(48)
where the rst line follows from (39), the second line from (37), the third line from (40) and the last line from (36). e total payo obtained by the US entrepreneur is
V F DI 1t ≡φ F DI * Φ(K * 2t ) − R 1 K F DI * 2t − η * Φ(K * 2t ) =(φ F DI * − η * )Φ(K * 2t ) − R 1 (K * 2t − K Local * 2t ) =(φ F DI * − η * )Φ(K * 2t ) − R 1 K * 2t + R 1 R 2 φ Local * Φ(K * 2t ) =R 1 Φ(K * 2t ) Φ (K * 2t ) − K * 2t(49)
Next, consider the opposite case: the U.S. rm does not conduct FDI whether by their own choice or by investment barriers. (e.g. security market liberalization) Obviously, the US entrepreneur has no incentive to pay monitoring costs any more. It is also clear that the FO entrepreneur receive no share of pro ts. e optimal contract problem in this case can be simply wri en as
max φ F DI ,K 2t ,K F DI 2t ,K Lo 2t φ F DI π L Φ(K 2t ) − R 1 K F DI 2t
subject to the constraints
K 2t = K F DI 2t + K Local 2t π L (1 − φ F DI )Φ(K 2t ) ≥ R 2 K Local 2t φ F DI ≤ 0
So we can easily see that φ Local = 1 and φ F DI = 0 must hold. e optimal level of investment is determined by the rst order condition of the FO entrepreneur:
Φ (K * * 2t ) = Φ (K Local * * 2t ) = R 2 π L
Note that as π L → 0, K * * 2t converges to zero, while K * 2t converges to a positive value because (44) becomes Φ (K * 2t ) = R 1

(1−B(η * )−η * ) , provided that B(η * ) + η * < 1. I assume that this is taken as given due to the functional form of B. e nal step of the proof is to compare equilibrium prices under the full integration, in which K * 2t arises, and under security market liberalization, in which K * * 2t arises. Returning back to the market clearing conditions in Proposition 3, the supply function in (24) is now replaced by
r t = π L Φ (K 2t ) −σ 2 s 2t − τ (1 − λ 2 )(50)
Or,
r t = (1 − B(η * ) − η * )Φ (K 2t ) −σ 2 s 2t − τ (1 − λ 2 )(51)
e rst line shows up in the case of security market liberalization, while the second line shows up in the case of full integration. In any case, one can derive
s 1t =σ 1 2A − (1 − ρσ 2 /σ 1 )K 2t 2A − a 1 − a 2
when ρ < 1 as in (28). Since K * 2t > K * * 2t > 0 when π L is su ciently small, we have s
(iii) 1t > s (ii) 1t > s (i) 1t .
is proves the rst part of the proposition. Lastly, it is easy to extend the proof of Proposition 3 to show V 


A.7 More Details on the Money Premium

In this subsection, I show that the parameter τ in Section 3 is equivalent to the money premium that is typically assumed in the banking literature. e household side remains largely unchanged. Households' budget constraints are now given by
da it = [(r * t + σ 1 s * 1t θ 1it )a it − c it ]dt + τ (1 − θ 1it )a it
Money Premium
+σ 1 θ 1it a it dz 1t
where τ is the money premium. One can interpret τ as the monetary value of banking service (= the creation of completely safe and liquid assets). is assumption plays a similar role to a convenience yield of money-like claims, which has been widely used in the banking literature (e.g. Stein 2012). To give a meaningful role to nancial intermediation, a model should deviate from the Modigliani-Miller framework. Here, I do so by distinguishing safe money-like claims from risky dividends.

De ne two savings curves, S t ≡ A t ≡ a it di and S 1t ≡ θ 1it a it di. Here, S t represents the total value of assets saved by households, while S 1t represents savings in domestic risky assets at time t. Using θ 1it = s * 1t σ 1 −τ σ 2


1

(1 − a a it ), we can rewrite these savings curves as
S t = A t , S 1t = s * 1t σ 1 − τ σ 2 1 (A t − a)
ese two savings curves constitute the demand side for the safe and domestic risky assets. Note that households are restricted only to the two types of assets, the money-like claim and the domestic risky asset. In this framework, one can de ne two distinct reward-to-risk ratios. One is the conventional Sharpe ratio, s * 1t . e other iss * 1t ≡
s * 1t σ 1 −τ σ 1
. e savings in the domestic risky asset can be wri en as S 1t =s * 1t
σ 1 (A t − a)
as in the baseline model. Given this setup, the bank creates assets by converting its future cash ow into risk-free and risky tranches. e bank simply maximizes contemporaneous residual pro ts
V * t dt Private Equity Income ≡ max Kt,Dt,Et dπ t − r * t D t dt Debt Income − (r * t + σ 1 s * 1t )E t dt Public Equity Income − σ 1 E t dz 1t
Public Equity Volatility

Equivalently, we can write this as
V * t dt ≡ max Kt,Dt,Et dπ t − r * t D t dt − (r * t + σ 1s * 1t + τ )E t dt − σ 1 E t dz 1t
which coincides with the bank's optimization problem in Section 3.

Pick J = 1 δ+m log(a it − κ r * ) + const. as a solution of (54) where const. ≡ log(δ+m)
δ+m + r * +m (δ+m) 2 − 1 δ+m − s * 2 1 2(δ+m) 2 . en, it is easy to show J a = 1 (δ + m)(a it − κ r * ) , J aa = − 1 (δ + m) a it − κ r * 2
Plugging these expressions into (54), we can verify that the right-hand side coincides with the le -hand side. at is,
log a it − κ r * + log(δ + m) + r * + m δ + m − 1 + 1 2 s * 2 1 (δ + m) = log(δ + m) + log a it − κ r * + r * δ + m − 1 + 1 2 s * 2 1 (δ + m)
Turning back to the rst order conditions, (52) and (53), we can write the nal solutions as
c it = (δ + m) a it − κ r * + κ = (δ + m)a it + (r * − m − δ)a θ 1it = s * 1 σ 1 1 − a a it
where a ≡ κ r * . 
θ it = Σ −1 σ 1 s 1 σ 2 s 2 1 − a a it where Σ ≡ [σ 2 1 , ρσ 1 σ 2 ; ρσ 1 σ 2 , σ 2 2 ] is the variance-covariance matrix.
Proof. In open economy, the value function associated with households' problem can be wri en as
(δ + m)J(a it ) = max {c it ,θ it } log(c it − κ) + J a {[σ 1 s 1 θ 1it + σ 2 s 2 θ 2it + r]a it − c it } + 1 2 J aa (σ 1 θ 1it ) 2 + (σ 2 θ 2it ) 2 + 2ρσ 1 σ 2 θ 1it θ 2it a 2
it e rst order conditions with respect to θ 1it , θ 2it and c it are
c it = (J a ) −1 + κ θ it = Σ −1 σ 1 s 1 σ 2 s 2 − J a a it J aa
Plugging them back to the value function, we have
(δ + m)J(a it ) = − log(J a ) + J a (ra it − κ) − 1 − 1 2 s 2 1 + s 2 2 − 2ρs 1 s 2 1 − ρ 2 J 2 a J aa(55)Pick J = 1 δ+m log(a it − κ r )+const. with const. ≡ log(δ+m) δ+m + r+m (δ+m) 2 − 1 δ+m − 1 2(δ+m) 2 s 2 1 +s 2 2 −2ρs 1 s 2 1−ρ 2 .
As before, it is easy to verify that this is a solution to equation (55). So we have
θ it = Σ −1 σ 1 s 1 σ 2 s 2 1 − a a it(56)
If Ω is positive de nite (i.e. 1 > ρ > 0), the second order condition holds.


B.2 Section 3: Endogenous Prices


B.2.1 Closed Economy

Let me begin with closed economy. Households maximize max θ 1it ,c it E 0 ∞ 0 e −(δ+m)t log(c it − κ)dt subject to the budget constraint da it = [(r * t + σs * 1t θ 1it )a it − c it ]dt + σ 1 θ 1it a it dz. e problem is equivalent to solving
max θ 1it ,c it E 0 ∞ 0 e −(δ+m)t log c it dt subject to da it = [(r * t + σ 1 s * 1t θ 1it )a it − c it − κ]dt + σ 1 θ 1it a it dz
Recall that κ is assumed to be κ = r * t a where a is constant. e key di erence from Section 2 is that r * t ≡ r * (A t ) and s * 1t ≡ s * 1 (A t ) are now functions of the aggregate state variables A t . We solve the household's problem by guessing and verifying an equilibrium. First, assume that households save according to
c it = (δ + m)a it − (δ + m)ā, θ 1it = s * 1t σ 1 1 − a a it
Substituting them into the households' budget constraint and integrating them with i, we can derive the evolution of wealth stock A t as follows
dA t = (r * (A t ) + s * 1 (A t ) 2 − δ − m)(A t − a) + m(A t − A 0 ) dt + s * 1 (A t )A t dz 1t ≡ µ A dt + σ A dz 1t(57)
where r * (A t ) and s * 1 (A t ) are given by (14) and (15) in the main text. us, the state variables for households' decision makings are A t and a it . Let J(a it , A t ) be the value function associated with the household's problem. We can then state the HJB equation as
(δ + m)Jdt = max c it ,θ 1,it log c it + J a {(r * t + σ 1 s * 1t θ 1,it )a it − c it − r * t a} + 1 2 J aa σ 2 1 θ 2 1it a 2 it + J A µ A + 1 2 J AA σ 2 A + J Aa σ 1 θ 1it a it σ A dt(58)
where µ A and σ A come from (57). e transversality condition is given by lim t→∞ e −δt J(a it , A t ) p → 0. Notice that the last three terms are added to the standard Merton's model. e rst order conditions yield
c it = (J a ) −1 θ 1it = −s * 1t J a σ 1 a it J aa + J Aa σ 1 a it σ A Let J(a it , A t ) ≡ 1
δ+m log(a it − a) + C(A t ) be a candidate value function where C(·) is implicitly de ned by an ordinary di erential equation
(δ + m)C(A t ) = log(δ + m) + r * (A t ) − δ − m δ + m − 1 2 (s 1 (A t )) 2 δ + m + C (A t )µ A + 1 2 C (A t )σ 2 A
with suitable boundary conditions. is makes θ 1it = −s * 1t Ja σ 1 a it Jaa . Substituting c it , θ 1it and J into the HJB equation, (58), we can verify that the le -hand side equals log(a it − a) + (δ + m)C(A t ) and the right-hand side equals
log(a it − a) + log(δ + m) + r * t − δ − m δ + m − 1 2 s 2 1t δ + m + C (A t )µ A + 1 2 C (A t )σ 2 A
erefore, we can con rm that the following solutions, along with the market clearing conditions, constitute an equilibrium.
c it = (δ + m)(a it − a) θ 1it = s * 1t σ 1 1 − a a it J(a it , A t ) = 1 δ + m log(a it − a) + C(A t )
e transversality condition holds. e simpli cation comes from a property of log utility. It allows to decompose J(a it , A t ) into two additively separable terms.


B.2.2 Open Economy

We again solve for an equilibrium by guessing and verifying. First, assume that the solutions of the households problem are given by
c it = (δ + m)(a it − a)(59)θ 1it = (s 1t − ρs 2t ) σ 1 (1 − ρ 2 ) 1 − a a it(60)θ 2it = (s 2t − ρs 1t ) σ 2 (1 − ρ 2 ) 1 − a a it(61)
en we can write the market clearing conditions as
Φ (K 1t ) −σ 1 s 1t − τ 1 (1 − λ 1 ) = r t Φ (K 2t ) −σ 2 s 2t − τ 2 (1 − λ 2 ) = r t s 1t − ρs 2t σ 1 (1 − ρ 2 ) (A 1t + A 2t − 2a) = K 1t s 2t − ρs 1t σ 2 (1 − ρ 2 ) (A 1t + A 2t − 2a) = K 2t K 1t + K 2t = A 1t + A 2t
It follows from the market clearing conditions that the state variable in the economy isĀ 1t ≡ A 1t + A 2t . Let r(Ā t ), s 1 (Ā t ) and s 2 (Ā t ) denote the market clearing prices pinned down by the above system of equations. Plug them into the budget constraints and integrate across households. We can then see that the aggregate state variable evolves according to
dĀ t = µĀdt + σĀ ,1 dz 1t + σĀ ,2 dz 2t where µĀ = Ā t − 2a 1 − ρ 2 s 1 (Ā t ) 2 + s 2 (Ā t ) 2 − 2ρs 1 (Ā t )s 2 (Ā t )) + r(Ā t ) − δ − m + m(A t − A 0 ) σĀ ,1 = s 1 (Ā t ) − ρs 2 (Ā t ) 1 − ρ 2Ā t σĀ ,2 = s 2 (Ā t ) − ρs 1 (Ā t ) 1 − ρ 2Ā t
Let J(a it ,Ā t ) denote the value function of households' problem. In open economy, the HJB equation is given by
(δ + m)Jdt = max c it ,θ it log c it + J a {[σ 1 s 1t θ 1,it + σ 2 s 2t θ 2it + r t ]a it − c it − r t a} + 1 2 J aa ((σ 1 θ 1,it ) 2 + (σ 2 θ 2it ) 2 + 2ρσ 1 σ 2 θ 1it θ 2it )a 2 it + JĀµĀ + 1 2 JĀĀ(σ 2 A,1 + σ 2 A,2 + 2ρσĀ ,1 σĀ ,2 ) + JĀ a (σ 1 θ 1it a it (σĀ ,1 + ρσĀ ,2 ) + σ 2 θ 2it a it (σĀ ,2 + ρσĀ ,1 )) dt Pick J(a it ,Ā t ) ≡ 1 δ + m log(a it − a) + C(Ā t )
where C(Ā t ) is a solution of the following di erential equation
(δ + m)C(A t ) = log(δ + m) + r t − δ − m δ + m − 1 2 s 2 1 + s 2 2 − 2ρs 1 s 2 (δ + m)(1 − ρ 2 ) + C (Ā t )µĀ + 1 2 C (Ā t )σ 2 A
with suitable boundary conditions. Note that the value function is consistent with consumption and portfolio choices given by (59), (60) and (61). Substituting them into the HJB equation, the le -hand side equals
log(a it − a) + (δ + m)C(Ā t )
while the right-hand side equals log(a it − a) + log(δ + m)
+ r t − δ − m δ + m − 1 2 s 2 1 + s 2 2 − 2ρs 1 s 2 (δ + m)(1 − ρ 2 ) + C (Ā t )µĀ + 1 2 C (Ā t )σ 2
A e transverality condition also holds. erefore, the proposed solutions and market clearing conditions constitute an equilibrium.


Appendix C antitative Analysis

In this section, I elaborate on more details about numerical simulations presented in Section 5.


C.1 Closed Economy

(i) Households' Problem e utility function is given by u(c it ) =
c 1−γ it 1−γ . Households' problem is now replaced by max c it E 0 ∞ 0 e −(δ+m)t u(c it )dt subject to da it = [(r * t + σ 1 s * 1t θ 1it + m)a it + w * 1t l it + r h h it − c it − κr * t ]dt + σ 1 θ 1it a it dz 1t θ 1it = max s * 1t χ 1 σ 1 1 − χ 2 a it − χ 3 a it l it , 0(62)
Unlike the baseline model, the portfolio choice function is taken as given. e functional form in (62) is an approximation to the actual solution in a sense that χ 1 = γ, χ 2 = κ, and χ 3 = 0 would arise if the model dispensed with labor income and housing assets. 40 (ii) Market Clearing Conditions One key advantage of Assumption 1 is that the market clearing conditions are now characterized by a nite number of aggregate variables. Let me rst turn to the market clearing conditions in a closed economy.
r * t = αZA α−1 1t L 1−α −σ 1 s * 1t − τ (1 − λ 1 ) (1 − λ)A 1t = i a it θ 1it di w * 1t = (1 − α)ZA α 1t L −α
e rst and second lines imply that nancial markets for the domestic safe and risky assets are cleared. e last line is associated with the labor market clearing condition. Note that the second 40 One can con rm this by applying the method in Appendix B.2.1 with u(c it ) =
c 1−γ it 1−γ .
line can be wri en as
(1 − λ)A 1t = a it ≥χ 2 +χ 3 /l i a it s 1t σ 1 χ 1 1 − χ 2 a it − χ 3 a it i di = s 1t σχ 1 (A 1t − F a 1t − F i ) where F a 1t = a it <χ 2 +χ 3 /l i a it di and F i = a it ≥χ 2 +χ 3 / i (χ 2 + χ 3 / i )di.
Here, F i is a time-invariant variable as, due to the se ing of this model, the measure of households whose wealth levels are below the threshold
χ 2 + χ 3 /l i is constant.
is is because when their wealth levels are close to this threshold they only invest in safe assets to retain their wealth. In actual simulations, it is convenient to express these market clearing conditions as
r * t ≡ r * (A 1t , F a 1t ) = αZA α−1 1t L 1−α −σ 1 s * 1 (A 1t ) − τ (1 − λ 1 ) s * 1t ≡ s * 1 (A 1t , F a 1t ) =σ 1 χ 1 A 1t A 1t − F a 1t − F i w * 1t ≡ w * 1 (A 1t , F a 1t ) = (1 − α)ZA α 1t L −α (iii)
Simulation Algorithm Numerical simulations for closed economy proceed in four steps. First, I begin with a guess for the law of motion for the state variables. In the model where all households retain wealth χ 2 + χ 3 / i , A 1t acts as a su cient statistics for current prices. e following law of motion ts the model well:
dA 1t A 1t = ((ψ 2 − 1) log A 1t + ψ 1 ) dt +σ 1 dz 1t(63)
where ψ 1 and ψ 2 are constants. It is worth noting that (63) corresponds to log A 1,t+1 = ψ 2 log A 1,t + ψ 1 +σ 1 t in the discrete-time se ing. is functional form is identical to the one used by Krusell and Smith (1998). On the other hand, in the model where some households are indebted, one may also consider the law of motion for F a 1t . In practice, dF a 1t = 0 worked well around the stationary state.

Second, given an initial guess for ψ 1 and ψ 2 , I solve di erential equations that characterize saving decisions of households and evolution of the wealth distribution. Let J t ≡ J(a, , ε, A t ) denote the value function associated with households' optimization problem. g t (a, , ) represents probability density distribution across households at time t. ey are pinned down by
(δ + m)J t dt = max c,θ 1 u(c) + ∂J t ∂a v t (a, , ) + 1 2 ∂ 2 J t ∂a 2 (σ 1 θ 1 a) 2 + ∂J t ∂ (−β ) + ζ ∞ −∞ (J t (a, , x) − J t (a, , ))φ(x)dx + 1 dt E t [dJ t ] dt (64) d dt g t (a, , ) = −mg t (a, , ) + mg 0 (a, , ε) − d da [v t (a, , )g t (a, , )] − ζg t (a, , ) + ζφ( ) ∞ −∞ g t (a, , x)dxd(65)
where
v t (a, l, ) ≡ [(r * t + σ 1 s * 1t θ 1 + m)a it + w * 1t l + r h h − c − κ(r * t + m)] indicate individual savings.
To nd a numerical approximation to the solution, I turn to a nite di erence method called "Upwind Scheme". More details are referred to the next subsection. e third step is to check if the initial guess for ψ 1 and ψ 2 is consistent with the ones derived from the Kolmogorov Forward Equation. Set the simulation period, say t = 0 to t = T . Starting from g 0 , I compute g 1 , ..., g T sequentially by applying the Kolmogorov Forward Equation. It is then easy to compute the mean of each distribution, A 1,0 , ..., A 1,T . e model-implied estimates, ψ 1 andψ 2 , are obtained by running ordinary least squares over the series. If the distance between (ψ 1 , ψ 2 ) and (ψ 1 ,ψ 2 ) is su ciently small, terminate the process. Otherwise, start with another guess for ψ 1 and ψ 2 and repeat the above steps. 41 Finally, once the model converges, I compute the t of the model to the observed data. I use 1989 as the benchmark year due to data availability of the Survey of Consumer Finances. I calibrate parameter values such that the stationary wealth distribution implied by the model ts the actual wealth distribution in the data.  2017) provides a nice introduction to this method and applications. I follow their notation and exposition throughout this chapter. Let a i , j and A k denote i'th, j'th and k'th coordinates of each variable; there are I, J and K discrete points along each dimension of the space. Let's rst consider the case = 0 for all t. 41 In actual practice, one can recursively update ψ k 1 and ψ k 2 to nd a xed point faster. e initial guess is denoted by ψ 0 1 and ψ 0 1 . I can then deriveψ 1 andψ 2 from the Kolmogorov Forward Equation. Update ψ 1 1 =ψ 1 and ψ 1 2 =ψ 2 and solve the model again. Repeat this process until the distance between (ψ k 1 , ψ k 2 ) and (ψ k+1
1 , ψ k+1 2 )
becomes su ciently small. is method appears to work well in simulation although there is no established result for this.

With this apparatus in place, it is natural to express other variables as where
c n,F i,j,k ≡ (u ) −1 J i+1,j,k − J i,j,k ∆a c n,B i,j,k ≡ (u ) −1 J i,j,k − J i−1,j,k ∆a
J n i,j,k is updated until ||J n i,j,k − J n−1 i,j,k || becomes su ciently small. See the discussion in Section 5 of Achdou et al. (2017) for the convergence property. e method is called 'Upwind Scheme' because it uses a forward di erence approximation whenever the dri of the state variable is positive; a backward di erence is used whenever the dri is negative.

A byproduct of this exercise is a numerical approximation to the Kolmogorov Forward Equation. Let t 1 , ..., t n denote grid points over evenly-spaced time intervals. Let g n i,j ≡ g tn (a i , j ) be wealth-labor distribution over grid points. For every n, one has to nd the nearest k such that A k ≈ i,j g n i,j a i . Starting from g 0 i,j , one has to update g n i,j iteratively according to a di erence equation:
g n+1 i,j − g n i,j ∆t = − (s n,F i,j,k ) + g n i,j − (s n,F i−1,j,k ) + g n i−1,j ∆a − (s n,B i+1,j,k ) − g n i+1,j − (s n,B i,j,k ) − g n i,j ∆a
where s n,F i,j,k and s n,F i,j,k are the values computed from (66) and (67). Here, I use (x) + ≡ max{x, 0} and (x) − ≡ min{x, 0} to simplify notations. I use this updating process to compute the series A 1,1 , A 1,2 and A 1,n in autarky. e stationary wealth distribution can be computed by replacing the le -hand side with zero. 


C.2 Open Economy
da it =[(r t + σ 1 s 1t θ 1it + σ 2 s 2t θ 2it + m)a it + w 1t l it + r h h it − c it − κ(r t + m)]dt + σ 1 θ 1it a it dz 1t + σ 2 θ 2it a it dz 2t θ 1it = max s 1t − ρs 2t χ 1 σ 1 (1 − ρ 2 ) 1 − χ 2 a it − χ 3 a it l it , 0 θ 2it = max s 2t − ρs 1t χ 1 σ 1 (1 − ρ 2 ) 1 − χ 2 a it − χ 3 a it l it , 0
from time T onward.

(ii) Market Clearing Conditions Under this se ing, the market clearing conditions can be stated as
αZK α−1 1t L 1−α 1 −σ 1 s 1t − τ 1 (1 − λ 1 ) = r t (68) αZK α−1 2t L 1−α 2 −σ 2 s 2t − τ 2 (1 − λ 2 ) = r t (69) s 1t − ρs 2t σ 1 (1 − ρ 2 )χ 1 (A 1t + A 2t − F a 1t − F a 2t − 2F i ) = K 1t (70) s 2t − ρs 1t σ 2 (1 − ρ 2 )χ 1 (A 1t + A 2t − F a 1t − F a 2t − 2F i ) = K 2t (71) K 1t + K 2t = A 1t + A 2t (72) (1 − α)ZK α 1t L −α 1 = w 1t(73)
when A 1t and A 2t are given. LetĀ t ≡ A 1t + A 2t and ζ(Ā t ) ≡ A 1t + A 2t − 2F a 1t − 2F i to simplify notation. We can merge some of these equations and write them as
s 1t − ρs 2t σ 1 (1 − ρ 2 )χ 1 + s 2t − ρs 1t σ 2 (1 − ρ 2 )χ 1 ζ(Ā t ) =Ā t (74) αZ s 1t − ρs 2t σ 1 (1 − ρ 2 )χ 1 ζ(Ā t ) α−1 L 1−α 1 −σ 1 s 1t − τ 1 (1 − λ 1 ) =αZ s 2t − ρs 1t σ 1 (1 − ρ 2 )χ 1 ζ(Ā t ) α−1 L 1−α 2 −σ 2 s 2t − τ 2 (1 − λ 2 )(75)
where the rst equation follows from (70), (71) and (72), and the second equation results from (68), (69), (70) and (71). It follows from these equations that s 1t and s 2t are functions ofĀ t so I denote them by s 1t ≡ s 1 (Ā t ) and s 2t ≡ s 2 (Ā t ). Substituting them back into (68) and (73), we can express r t and w 1t as
r t ≡ r(Ā t ) = αZ s 1 (Ā t ) − ρs 2 (Ā t ) σ 1 (1 − ρ 2 )χ 1 ζ(Ā t ) α−1 L 1−α 1 −σ 1 s 1 (Ā t ) − τ 1 (1 − λ 1 ) (76) w 1t ≡ w 1 (Ā t ) = (1 − α)Z s 1 (Ā t ) − ρs 2 (Ā t ) σ 1 (1 − ρ 2 )χ 1 ζ(Ā t ) α L −α 1(77)
erefore, we can regardĀ t as the sole state variable associated with the market clearing conditions.

(iii) Simulation Algorithm Let me describe a simulation algorithm for open economy. For expository purposes, I rst consider the case that the initial state of the economy is open while setting aside transition from autarky to open economy. e simulation begins by guessing the law of motion for the state variables. In the simple case where all households retain a it ≥ χ 2 + χ 3 / i , the following functional form works well in simulations:
dĀ t A 1t
= (ψ 2 − 1) logĀ t + ψ 1 dt + σĀ ,1 dz 1t + σĀ ,1 dz 1t (78)

where σĀ ,1 = s 1 (Ā t ) − ρs 2 (Ā t ) 1 − ρ 2Ā t σĀ ,2 = s 2 (Ā t ) − ρs 1 (Ā t ) 1 − ρ 2Ā t s 1 (Ā t ) and s 2 (Ā t ) are solutions of the system of equations, (74) and (75). Households take this motion into account when they make investment decisions. Again, in the model where some households are indebted, one may also consider the law of motion for F a 1t and . In practice, dF a 1t = 0 worked well around the stationary state. Second, given an initial guess for ψ 1 and ψ 2 , I solve di erential equations that characterize saving decisions of households and evolution of the wealth distribution. is step is similar to that of closed economy. Let J t ≡ J(a, , ε, A t ) denote the value function associated with households' optimization problem. g t (a, , ) represents probability density distribution across households at time t. ey are characterized by the HJB equation and the Kolmogorov Forward Equation shown in (64) and (65), but now the saving function, v t , is replaced by v t (a, l, ) ≡ [(r t + σ 1 s 1t θ 1 + σ 2 s 2t θ 2 + m)a it + w 1t l + r h h − c − κ(r t + m)] e market clearing conditions are (74), (75), (76) and (77). To nd a numerical approximation to the solution, I again turn to a nite di erence method ("Upwind Scheme") as in closed economy. e third step is to check if the initial guess for ψ 1 and ψ 2 is consistent with the ones derived from the Kolmogorov Forward Equation. I again set the simulation period, say t = T to t = 2T . e procedure is similar to that of closed economy. Starting from g T , I compute g T +1 , ..., g 2T sequentially by applying the Kolmogorov Forward Equation. It is then easy to compute the mean of each distribution, A 1,0 , ..., A 1,T . e model-implied estimates,ψ 1 andψ 2 , are obtained by running ordinary least squares over the series. If the distance between (ψ 1 , ψ 2 ) and (ψ 1 ,ψ 2 ) is su ciently small, terminate the process. Otherwise, start with another guess for ψ 1 and ψ 2 and repeat the above steps. e rst thing to consider is to incorporate capital gains stemming from unanticipated changes in the economy. Let p t denote the price of a unit of equity for taking a σ 1 dz 1t . No arbitrage condition implies that, immediately a er the shock, the price movement is dictated by dp t p t + (r * t + σ 1 s * 1t )dt p t = (r t + σ 1 s 1t )dt

In the numerical simulation, I approximate the path of p t by turning to a discrete-time version E t p t+1 − p t + r * t + σ 1 s * 1t p t = r t + σ 1 s 1t

Since p t = 1 for all t < T , we have
p new T ≈ E T ∞ t=T (r * t + σs * t ) (1 + r t + σs 1t ) t ≡ E T ∞ t=T
(r * (A 1t ) + σs * 1 (A 1t )) (1 + r(A 1t + A 2t ) + σs 1 (A 1t + A 2t )) t I then simulate the stochastic processes of A 1t and A 2t according to (78) in discrete time. I run Monte Carlo simulations to compute the expected value numerically.

Let g n i,j,k denote the wealth distribution prior to nancial globalization, and g n+1 i,j,k denote the wealth distribution immediately a er capital gains are realized. g n+1 i,j,k is updated according to a di erence equation g n+1 i,j − g n i,j ∆t = − (s n,F i,j,k ) + g n i,j − (s n,F i−1,j,k ) + g n i−1,j ∆a − (s n,B i+1,j,k ) − g n i+1,j − (s n,B i,j,k ) − g n i,j ∆a But now I i,j,k in s n,F i,j,k and s n,B i,j,k , which are computed from (66) and (67), is replaced by
(r * (A k ) + σ 1 s * 1 (A k )θ 1,i,j,k + m + p new T )a i + j w * 1 (A k ) + r h h i,j,k − κ(r * (A k ) + m)
Essentially, households receive unanticipated capital gains and these incomes show up in the budget constraint in period T = t n . Starting from g n+1 i,j,k , I again use the di erence equation without capital gains to compute g n+2 i,j,k …., g 2n i,j,k .


Appendix D Additional Details D.1 Estimation of the Risk Premium

To illustrate the point, let d t+1 denote the dividend for year t + 1, P t denote the price at the end of year t and R t+1 denote the return for year t + 1. e return is then measured as the dividend yield d t+1 Pt plus the rate of capital gains.
R t+1 = d t+1 P t + P t+1 − P t P t(79)
What we aim to estimate here is E t [R t+1 ].

e key identifying assumption is the stationarity of the valuation ratios. Fama and French (2002) proposes that the dividend growth rate (d t+1 − d t )/d t can be an estimate of the expected capital gains under the assumption that the dividendprice ratio d t /P t is stationary i.e. mean reverting. In the same manner, the earning growth rate (E t+1 − E t )/E t can be an alternative estimate of the expected capital gains if the earning-price ratio is a stationary process. Furthermore, Campbell and ompson (2008) combines this formula with the steady-state relation between dividend growth and accounting return on equity. e return for year t + 1 can be expressed as
R t+1 = d t+1 e t+1 e t+1 P t + 1 − d t+1 e t+1 e t+1 B t(80)
where B t is the book value of equity. Campbell (2008) then uses three-year smoothed return on equity, dividend yields, and payout ratios to estimate the time varying equity premium. In the analysis that follows, I consider these three approaches and denote them by FF Dividends, FF Earnings and CT RoE respectively. I use ve-year smoothed dividend growth rates and earnings growth rates for the rst two cases. ese methods are well suited to judging whether the average realized return is high or low relative to the expected return implied by fundamentals.


D.2 Kolmogorov Forward Equation (Section 2)

We have seen that the wealth of individual i, conditional on being alive, evolves according to an Itô di usion process 


D.3 Convergence of the Wealth Distribution

In autarky, the stationary wealth distribution is the unique solution of the following ordinary di erential equation Lemma 3. For any twice continuously di erentiable function q(a, t), the following inequality holds ∂|q(a, t)| ∂t ≤ −m|q(a, t)| + m|g 0 (a)| − (r * + s * 2
1 − δ − m)
∂|(a − a)q(a, t)| ∂a

Proof. Let z(q(a, t)) = 2 + q(a, t) 2 . is mapping has property: lim →0 z(q(a, t)) = |q(a, t)|.

Next, one can show that ∂z(q(a, t)) ∂t − −mz(q(a, t)) + mg 0 (a) − ∂[(r * + s * 2 1 − δ − m)(a − a)]z(q(a, t)) ∂a =z (q) ∂q(a, t) ∂t + ∂q(a, t) ∂a (r * + s * 2 1 − δ − m)(a − a) + mz(q(a, t)) − mg 0 (a) =z (q)(−mq(a, t) + mg 0 (a)) + mz(q(a, t)) − mg 0 (a) = m(z (q)q(a, t) + z(q(a, t))) Term (i) + mg 0 (a)(z (q) − 1)


Term (ii)

Term (i) and Term (ii) vanish to zero as → 0, because
Term (i) = m − q 2 2 + q 2 + 2 + q 2 = m 2 2 + q 2 Term (ii) = mg 0 (a) q 2 + q 2 − 1
On the other hand, the le -hand side becomes ∂|q(a, t)| ∂t − −m|q(a, t)| + m|g 0 (a)| − (r * + s * 2 − δ − m) ∂|(a − a)q(a, t)| ∂a since lim →0 z(q(a, t)) = |q(a, t)|. is completes the proof.

Using this lemma and substituting q(a, t) = g t (a) − g(a), it is straightforward to show that 


D.4 Discrete Time Model

In this subsection, I follow Merton (1992) to construct a di usion process in the households' problem. I use the standard O notations to describe asymptotic properties.

at is,
f 1 (h) = O[f 2 (h)] if lim h→0 f 1 (h)/f 2 (h) is bounded andf 1 (h) = o[f 2 (h)] if lim h→0 f 1 (h)/f 2 (h) = 0. Also, f 1 (h) ∼ f 2 (h) if f 1 (h) = O[f 2 (h)] but f 1 (h) = o[f 2 (h)].
Consider a nite time interval [0, T ) prior to a structural change in period T ≡ nh. Financial markets are cleared at time 0, h, 2h, ... and nh respectively. Here, h denotes the minimum length of time between the successive clearings of markets. By investing the K t units of goods in period t ≡ kh, the representative rm generates new goods Φ(K t )h +σK t t+h in period t + h where t+h is the unanticipated productivity change between period t and period t + h. e following assumptions are made on t+h .

(A1) t+h can take on any one of n distinct values. For k = 1, ..., n , let (k) denote one of its values and p(k) represent probability that t+h = (k) occurs conditional on all information in period t. Assume that (k) is a su ciently well behaved function of h such that (k) ∼ {Φ(K t ) − r * (S t )D t − (r * (S t ) + σ 1 s * 1 (S t ) + τ )E t }h subject to the following constraints:
K t = D t + E t , σ 1 =σ K t E t , D t ≤ λK t
e equilibrium value of r * (S t ) and s * 1 (S t ) are pinned down by the market clearing conditions that I will specify later.

Turning back to the budget constraint, household i comes into period t with wealth a it . We can write a it as
a it = n it p t + n D it(84)
where n it is the number of stock shares, p t is the stock price and n D it is the number of deposits owned by individual i in period t. e portfolio weight on risky assets is θ 1it = n it p t /a it . Each deposit pays r t h in period t + h with no uncertainty. Each equity share pays x(S t )h + σ 1 p t t+h in period t + h and it also pledges future payo s x(S t+kh )h + σ 1 p t+kh t+(k+1)h for all future periods k = 1, 2, .... Ex post return of equity shares, x(St)h pt + σ 1 t+h , depends on the realization of t+h . A er the dice are rolled up, t+h is determined, interest rates are paid and households rebalance their portfolio. All trades are made at known current prices. Households also receive annuity mh for their wealth holdings. We can then obtain (n it π(S t ) + n D it r(S t ) − c i,t+h )h + n it p t σ t+h =(n i,t+h − n it )p t+h + (n D i,t+h − n D it )

Merging (84) and (85), we have
a i,t+h − a it = n i,t+h p t+h − n it p t + n D i,t+h − n D it = (n i,t+h − n it )p t+h + n it (p t+h − p t ) + n D i,t+h − n D it = r * (S t ) + θ 1it x(S t ) p t − r * (S t ) a t − c t+h h + p t+h − p t p t a it + σ 1 θ 1it a it t+h
Finally, the equilibrium value of r * (S t ) and s * (S t ) are pinned down by the market clearing conditions. In equilibrium, the nancial intermediary equalizes p t+h − p t p t + x(S t )h p t + σ t+h = (r(S t ) + σs(S t )) h + σ t+h since, otherwise, they can make pro ts by taking long-short strategies. I assume that x(S t ) = r * (S t ) + σ 1 s * 1 (S t ), so have p t = 1 for all t as long as there is no unanticipated change. Let r * t ≡ r * (S t ) and s t ≡ s 1 (S t ). Plugging this into the household's budget constraint and taking a limit h → 0, we can see that a i,t follows a di usion process da it = ((r * t + σs * 1t θ it )a it − c it ) dt + σ 1 θ 1it a it dz 1t in view of (A1), (A2), and (A3).


1. d log Ω T . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 A.1.2 Result 2. d log Ω ∞ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 A.2 More Details on Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52 A.3 Proof of Collorary 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 A.4 Proof ofProposition 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 A.4.1 Case 1. ρ ∈ (0, 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . 54 A.4.2 Case 2. ρ = 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56 A.5 More Details on Foreign Direct Investment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 A.6 Proof of Proposition 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 A.7 More Details on the Money Premium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62 B HJB Equations 63 B.1 Section 2. Exogenous Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 B.1.1 Closed Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 B.1.2 Open Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 B.2 Section 3: Endogenous Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 B.2.1 Closed Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 B.2.2 Open Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 C antitative Analysis 69 C.1 Closed Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69 C.2 Open Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 D Additional Details 77 D.1 Estimation of the Risk Premium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77 D.2 Kolmogorov Forward Equation (Section 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77 D.3 Convergence of the Wealth Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 D.4 Discrete Time Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80


circulated under the title " e World's Banker: On the Rise in US Wealth Inequality. " I am grateful to my advisors, Gita Gopinath, Pol Antràs, Kenneth Rogo , and Jeremy Stein, for their thoughtful advice. I would also like to thank John Campbell, Vu Chau, ummim Cho, Xiang Ding, Emmanuel Farhi, Xavier Gabaix, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Elhanan Helpman, Yosub Jung, Casey Kearney, Divya Kirti, Spencer Kwon, Andrew Lilley, Ma eo Maggiori, Michael-David Mangini, Ben Moll, Giselle Montamat, Elisa Rubbo, Gea Hyun Shin, Hillary Stein, Ludwig Straub, Maria Voronina, Brian Wheaton, and Paul Willen for their feedback. All errors are my own.

Figure 1 :
1Financial


(Ahn et al. 2018, Fernández-Villaverde et al. 2018 and Kaplan et al. 2018) to conduct a full-blown quantitative analysis.

(
Jaumo e et al. 2008, Furceri and Loungani 2015, Furceri et al. 2017), although the focus of this paper is more on wealth inequality and on the US economy. While most of the literature explores trade liberalization and wage inequality 8 , I emphasize the importance of capital income and the nancial side of globalization.


15 Similar approaches have been taken in previous studies, such as Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2018), Ahn et al. (2018) and Kaplan et al. (2018) to establish tractability. e notion of stationary state in my model corresponds to the stochastic steady state de ned by Fernández-Villaverde et al.

Figure 2 :
2Capital

Figure 3
3Figure 3: Closed Economy Equilibrium (a) Total Assets

Figure 4
4Figure 4: Open Economy Equilibrium (a) Total Assets

Proposition 4 .
4e liberalization of security markets and FDI transforms the US portfolio frontier such that


Following Ahn et al. (2018), I use J t (a, , ε) ≡ J(a, , ε, g t ) to denote the value function associated with the household's problem. e second component is the Kolmogorov Forward Equation which governs the evolution of the wealth distribution. As in the baseline model, we focus on the trajectory in which dz 1t = dz 2t ≡ 0 in autarky and dz 1t = dz 2t = 0 in open economy. Proposition 5. e wealth distribution evolves according to the following di erential equations


See Ahn et al. (2018) for an introductory guide to this approach. See Kaplan et al. (2018) and Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2018) for its applications and variants.


for tractability. Indeed, most studies in the literature on heterogeneous-agent macroeconomics (e.g. Hubmer et al. 2018) assume exogenous portfolio heterogeneity.


For alternative methods, see Ahn et al. (2018) or Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2018)


et al. (2013), Saez and Zucman (2016) and Pike y et al. (2018) to compute asset returns that are consistent with macroeconomic statistics. 38 e Fed provides the estimated value of closely held stock by matching it with the market value of publicly traded rms with similar characteristics.

Figure 5 :
5Interest All returns and gains are measured in real terms. Smoothed returns stand for the geometric average of returns over twenty year period. e right-hand side of the time horizon is shorter in the last ten data points. Due to the data constraint, the Sharpe ratio is only calculated during 1982-2017. Simple average stands for the mean return over the standard deviation of returns, with no consideration of capital gains. CT ROE indicates the estimated risk premium based on accouting return on equity(Campbell 2008 andCampbell andompson 2008). FF Div and FF Earnings are based on dividend growth rates and earning growth rates respectively.(Fama and French 2002) 

Figure 6
6Figure 6: Model Fit (a) Wage Distribution (b) Top Wage Share

Figure 7
7Panel (a) plots the model-implied wealth distribution prior to the shock and 30 years a er the shock. Panel (b) displays transitional dynamics of the wealth distribution. Panel (c) presents capital allocation line in autarky. Panel (d) shows the balance sheet reallocation induced by nancial globalization.

Figure 8 :
8Reversal

Figure 9 :
9Transitional Dynamics in Di erent Scenarios (a) Top 1% Wealth Shares (b) Bo om 90% Wealth Shares Notes: Panel (a) displays transitional dynamics of the top 1% wealth shares under di erent scenarios. Panel (b) plots the corresponding graphs for the bo om 90% wealth shares. Data estimates are computed from the Survey of Consumer Finances.

[ 66 ]
66M. E. Yaari, "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the eory of the Consumer, " e Review of Economic Studies, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 137-150, 04 1965. 1. d log Ω T It follows from the di erential equation (4) that the price of domestic equities rises to p T = r * +σ 1 s * 1 r+σ 1 s 1 > 1. Using this, we can write Ω T as Ω T = ∞ a=G * −1 (0.99) a(1 − θ 1 (a)) + r * +σ 1 s * 1 r+σ 1 s 1 aθ 1 (a) g * (a)da ∞ a=a a(1 − θ 1 (a)) + r * +σ 1 s * 1 r+σ 1 s 1 aθ 1 (a) g * (a)dawhere G * (·) and g * (·) are c.d.f. and p.d.f. of the wealth distribution prior to the shock. e numerator is the average net worth of the top 1 percent households; the cuto is given by G * −1 (0.99).


sign of φ 1 follows from Lemma 1 below, which suggests that∞ a=G * −1 (0.99) aθ 1 (a)g * (a)da ∞ a=G * −1 (0.99) a(1 − θ 1 (a))g * (a)da > ∞ a=a aθ 1 (a)g * (a)da ∞ a=a a(1 − θ 1 (a))g * (a)da


∞ a=x aθ 1 (a)g * (a)da∞ x a(1 − θ 1 (a))g * (a)da = ∞ x aθ 1 (a)g * (a)da/ ∞ x ag * (a) 1 − ∞ x aθ 1 (a)g * (a)da/ ∞ a=x ag * (a)


− a) r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ+m r * +(s * 1 ) 2 −δ mg 0 (x) r * + (s * 1 ) 2 − δ dx = C 1 < ∞for some constant C 2 . us, it is easy we turn to the stationary wealth distribution and its Pareto exponent in open economy.To establish an analogous result, we use the following lemma.Lemma 2. In open economy, household i's portfolio choice functions, θ it = [θ 1it , θ 2it ] , are characterized by


. Also, V F DI 1t > 0 follows from(49),(44) and the Inada conditions associated with Φ(·).


let me turn to open economy. Portfolio frontier is now given by {r, (s 1 , σ 1 ), (s 2 , σ 2 )} with ρ being the correlation between dz 1t and dz 2t . e results are summarized as follows Lemma 2. In open economy, household i's portfolio choices, θ it = [θ 1it , θ 2it ] , are characterized by

(
cf) Unwind Scheme Here, I brie y summarize the core idea to approximately solve the HJB equation and Kolmogorov Forward Equation. Achdou et al. (


(i) Households' Problem In open economy, the budget constraint and portfolio choice functions are now replaced by

(
iv) Transition to open economy Once the model converges, I turn back to transitional dynamics from autarky to open economy.


da t = [(r * + s * 2 1 − δ − m)(a it − a)]dt + s * 1 a t dz 1t(81)can be wri en asG t+dt (a) = (1 − mdt)G t a − [(r + s 2 − δ − m)(a − a)]dt + mdtG 0 (a) which leads to G t+dt (a) − G t (a) dt = −mG t (a) + mG 0 (a) + (1 − mdt) G t (a − [(r + s 2 − δ)(a − κ)]dt) − G t (a) dtTaking dt → 0, we havedG t (a) dt = −mG t (a) + mG 0 (a) − [(r * + s * 2 − δ − m)(a − a)]g t (a)Di erentiating the both sides with respect to a, we can derived dt g t (a) = −mg t (a) + mg 0 (a) − d da [(r * + σ 1 s * 1 θ 1 (a))a − c(a)]g t (a) it ) and c(a) = (δ + m)a + (r * − δ − m)a.We can analogously derive the case for the open economy.


0 = −mg(a) + mg 0 (a) − ∂[(r * + s * 2 1 − δ − m)(a − a)]g(a) ∂a subject to the condition ∞ a g(a) = 1. e aim of this subsection is to show that ∞ κ |g t (a) − g(a)|da ≤ e −mt I follow a similar strategy to Gabaix et al. (2016) to prove this inequality.


t (a) − g(a)| − (r * + s m|g t (a) − g(a)|} da en, Gronwell's lemma leads to ∞ κ |g t (a) − g(a)|da ≤ e −mt So the wealth distribution converges to g(a) as t → ∞

(
A2) E t [ t+h ] = 0 and lim h→0 n k=1 p(k) (k) 2 /h = 1 (A3) { kh } n k=1 are independent and identically distributed across times k = 1, 2, ..., n A market equilibrium price is given by {r(S t ), (s(S t ), σ)}, which is a function of the aggregate state variables S t . e rm's problem can be stated as maximizing V t h ≡ max Kt,Dt,Et


adrini 2000, Cage i and De Nardi 2006) with li le modeling of nancing instruments such as tranching, pooling, and portfolio diversication. More recent studies emphasize return heterogeneity (Hubmer et al. 2018, Kacperczyk et al. 2018 9 ). is paper also relates to the literature on trade liberalization and wealth dynamics. (Chesnokova 2007, Antràs and Caballero 2010) For modeling tools, I embed global nancial markets to a model of Pareto Inequality which orginates back to

Table 1 :
1Back-of-the-envelope CalculationNotes:is table displays back-of-the-envelope calculations for changes in wealth concentration under di erent scenarios. A period mark indicates that the value is identical to the le column. In column (1), the values, 0.5, 0.35, and 0.19, represent portfolio weights in equity by the top 1%, the top 1-9% and the bo om 90% household groups. Data here refers to the top wealth shares estimated by the Survey of Consumer Finances.Scenarios 


Table 2 :
2Related Statistics for Equity Premium and Shape Ratio t+1/P t E t+1 /P t GD t GE t RoE t D t /E tMixed Portfolio 


Table 3 :
3Calibrated ParametersParam. 
Description 
US 
ROW Source / Target 

Preferences 
δ 
Discount Rate 
0.05 
. 
γ 
EIS 
2 
. 
c 1 , c 2 , c 3 Portfolio Choice 
2, 1, 1.5 
. 
Survey of Consumer Finances 
β h1 , β h2 Housing Endowments 
0.27, 2.2 
. 

Production 
α 
Capital Share 
0.3 
. 
NIPA (2014) 
Z 
Aggregate Productivity 
0.43 
. 
US Autarky wage normalized to 1 
σ 
Aggregate Volatility 
0.125 
0.15 Internally Calibrated 
ρ 
Global Correlation 
0.7 
. 
Internally Calibrated 

Financial Frictions 
λ 
Pledgeability 
0.5 
0.43 Internally Calibrated 
τ 
Additional Equity Cost 
0.065 
. 
a 
Maximum Allowable Debt 
-1.9 
. 

Idiosyncratic Shocks 
m 
Death Rate 
0.025 
. 
Avg. Life Span: 40 years 
µ , Σ 
Labor Productivity 
0.3, 9 
. 
Internally Calibrated 
λ , β , σ Time-varying Productivity 0.03, 0, 0 
. 
µ a , Σ aa 
Inherited Wealth 
0.55, 0.49 
. 
Internally Calibrated 
Σ a 
Covariance between a 0 & 
0.03 
. 
Internally Calibrated 


Table 4 :
4Transitional DynamicsNotes:is table displays transitional dynamics of the wealth distribution and equilibrium prices. Data estimates are computed from the Survey of Consumer Finances.Wealth Shares 
Bo om 90% Top 10% Top 5% Top 1% 
Autarky 
0.351 
0.649 
0.537 
0.312 
Data Estimates (1989) 
0.329 
0.671 
0.542 
0.299 

Open (a er 0 year) 
-5.8%p 
+5.8%p 
+5.2%p +1.5%p 
Open (a er 30 years) 
-7.0%p 
+7.0%p 
+7.7%p +4.8%p 
Data Estimates (2016) 
-10.0%p 
+10.0%p 10.9%p +8.7%p 

Open (New Stationary State) 
-13.4%p 
+13.4%p +13.7%p +8.8%p 

Equilibrium Prices 
r 
s 1 
r + σ 1 s 1 
s 2 
Autarky 
0.033 
0.191 
0.081 
Open (stationary) 
0.023 
0.399 
0.073 
0.43 



Table 5
5displays the results. e rst conclusion is that a change in wage inequality has a relatively small impact on the top wealth holders. is nding is consistent with what Hubmer et al. (2018) reported. A major source of income of the top wealth holders is capital, not labor. e widened wage inequality has limited e ects on how these wealth holders reinvest their capital.

Table 5 :
5Factor DecompositionWealth Shares 
Bo om 90% Top 10% Top 5% 
Top 1% 
Autarky 
35.1% 
64.9% 
53.7% 
31.2% 

E ect 1: Wage Inequality Only 
-1.3%p 
+1.3%p 
+1.8%p 
+1.0%p 
E ect 2: Global Capital Flows Only 
-6.8%p 
+6.8%p 
+8.2%p 
+4.8%p 
(1 and 2 combined) 
( -8.2%p) 
(+8.2%p) (+9.1%p) (+4.5%p) 

E ect 3: Residuals 
-4.0%p 
+4.0%p 
+2.3%p 
+3.0%p 

Data Estimates (2016) 
-12.2%p 
+12.2%p +11.4%p +7.4%p 

Notes: is table displays changes in the wealth distribution over 30 years under di erent scenarios. E ect 1 
represents a case where the economy experiences changes in wage inequality while other parameters being 
constant. E ect 2 presents the corresponding estimates in the previous analysis. Numbers in the parenthesis 
indicate the joint e ect. E ect 3 is de ned as the gap between Data Estimates (2016) and (1 and 2 combined). 


Banks here can be more accurately thought of as any consolidated entity, a category encompassing private sector companies, nancial intermediaries, and government.
One may notice that the equation has no quadratic term that typically appears in a Kolmogorov Forward Equation. is is because the model has no idiosyncratic return and the wealth distribution is only de ned along the zero trajectory.17 e approximation method yields analytically tractable results. SeeJones (2015) andGabaix et al. (2016) for other studies using this conversion.
Later on, I will also talk about the case where two identical countries are integrated. e only driver for global nancial ows in this case is diversi cation bene t. See Remark 2 in Section 4.
In an open economy, A 1t + A 2t acts as the state variable of the economy where A 1t ≡ a U S it di and A 2t ≡
e approximation is exact under Epstein-Zin utility with no labor income: χ 1 is again the risk aversion parameter and χ 2 = χ 3 = 0.
To guarantee an interior solution, I assume B (η) > 0, lim η→0 B (η) = 0 and lim η→∞ B(η) = ∞.
Appendix B HJB EquationsIn this section, I elaborate on more details about the Hamiltonian-Jacobian-Bellman equations that are used in various parts of the paper. I begin with a simple case in which nancial prices are xed and given as in Section 2.B.1 Section 2. Exogenous PricesB.1.1 Closed EconomyDe ne the value function associated with the maximization problemsubject to the budget constraint(2). We can then restate a household's problem aswith the transversality conditionPlugging them into the value function, we obtainwhere I i,j,k is gross income of individual households and h i,j,k is the holding of housing assets corresponding to a i,j,k e value function is de ned over these points so I shall use the short-hand notationStarting with an initial guess of J 0 i,j,k , the aim of this exercise is to iteratively update J n i,j,k until it converges to a certain function. A natural initial guess isδ+m . Let n denote a current iteration. e second step of this exercise is to compute a rst di erence, (J n i,j,k ) , usingi,j,k e third step is to convert c n i,j,k = (u ) −1 ((J n i,j,k ) ). e forth step is to update J n i,j,k , n = 1, 2, ... according towhere ∆ is the iteration step size, ∆a is the gap between two points in asset grid and ∆A is the gap in the state variable grid. v + i,jk and v − i,j,k represent saving functions given byin the case of autarky. Subscript i is repressed. Let (Ω, F, P) represent a probability space on which the above di usion process is de ned. Note that (81) can be expressed as an integral formfor ω ∈ F. e last term on the right-hand side expression is the Ito integral de ned bywhere {ζ n } is a sequence of elementary functions0 otherwise over evenly spaced intervals i.e. t j = tj/n. Pick anyω ∈ F such that z 1t 1 (ω) = z 1t 2 (ω) = ... = z 1t k (ω) = z 0 for all t 1 , ..., t k and any k. Such a trajectory always exists because a random vector (z 1t 1 , ..., z 1t k ) is Gaussian. In this case, we can see thatfor all n. us, along this trajectory, we haveFrom this point on, we denote by a t ≡ a t (ω) the solution of the di erential equation (83). Reviving the subscript i, we can write its dynamics as da it = [(r * + s * 2 1 − δ − m)(a it − a)]dt Along this trajectory, we can de ne a cross-sectional wealth distribution G t (a) in period t as G t (a) = [0,1] I {i∈[0,1]:a it ≤a} (i)di. I denote by g t (a) = ∂Gt(a) ∂a its density distribution. Take a small interval [t, t + dt). A mdt measure of households drop out and replaced with the newborn households.ose who remain accumulate (or deccumulate) their wealth from a it to a i,t+dt = a it + [(r * + s * 2 1 − δ − m)(a it − a)]dt. In view of this dynamics, the period t + dt wealth distribution
Income and Wealth Distribution in Macroeconomics: A Continuous-Time Approach. Y Achdou, J Han, J.-M Lasry, P.-L Lions, B Moll, National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper 23732Y. Achdou, J. Han, J.-M. Lasry, P.-L. Lions, and B. Moll, "Income and Wealth Distribution in Macroeconomics: A Continuous-Time Approach, " National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 23732, August 2017.

When Inequality Ma ers for Macro and Macro Ma ers for Inequality. S Ahn, G Kaplan, B Moll, T Winberry, C Wolf, NBER Macroeconomics Annual. 321S. Ahn, G. Kaplan, B. Moll, T. Winberry, and C. Wolf, "When Inequality Ma ers for Macro and Macro Ma ers for Inequality, " NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 1-75, 2018.

Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving. S R Aiyagari, e arterly Journal of Economics. 1093S. R. Aiyagari, "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving, " e arterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109, no. 3, pp. 659-684, 1994.

On the Role of Financial Frictions and the Saving Rate during Trade Liberalizations. P Antràs, R J Caballero, Journal of the European Economic Association. 82-3P. Antràs and R. J. Caballero, "On the Role of Financial Frictions and the Saving Rate during Trade Liberalizations, " Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 8, no. 2-3, pp. 442- 455, 2010.

Multinational Firms, FDI Flows, and Imperfect Capital Markets. P Antràs, M A Desai, C F Foley, e arterly Journal of Economics. 12431171P. Antràs, M. A. Desai, and C. F. Foley, "Multinational Firms, FDI Flows, and Imperfect Capital Markets, " e arterly Journal of Economics, vol. 124, no. 3, p. 1171, 2009.

Rich Pickings? Risk, Return, and Skill in Household Wealth. L Bach, L E Calvet, P Sodini, FIN-2016-1126Tech. Rep.L. Bach, L. E. Calvet, and P. Sodini, "Rich Pickings? Risk, Return, and Skill in Household Wealth, " Tech. Rep. FIN-2016-1126, 2018.

Skewed Wealth Distributions: eory and Empirics. J Benhabib, A Bisin, J. Benhabib and A. Bisin, "Skewed Wealth Distributions: eory and Empirics, " 2018.

A Di culty with the Optimum antity of Money. T Bewley, Econometrica. 515T. Bewley, "A Di culty with the Optimum antity of Money, " Econometrica, vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 1485-1504, 1983.

Debt, De cits, and Finite Horizons. O J Blanchard, Journal of Political Economy. 932O. J. Blanchard, "Debt, De cits, and Finite Horizons, " Journal of Political Economy, vol. 93, no. 2, pp. 223-247, 1985.

An Equilibrium Model of Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates. R J Caballero, E Farhi, P.-O Gourinchas, American Economic Review. 981R. J. Caballero, E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas, "An Equilibrium Model of Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates, " American Economic Review, vol. 98, no. 1, pp. 358-93, March 2008.

Rents, Technical Change, and Risk Premia Accounting for Secular Trends in Interest Rates, Returns on Capital, Earning Yields, and Factor Shares. 107--, "Rents, Technical Change, and Risk Premia Accounting for Secular Trends in Interest Rates, Returns on Capital, Earning Yields, and Factor Shares, " American Economic Review, vol. 107, no. 5, pp. 614-20, May 2017.

Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth. M Cage, M. De Nardi, Journal of Political Economy. 1145M. Cage i and M. De Nardi, "Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth, " Journal of Political Economy, vol. 114, no. 5, pp. 835-870, 2006.

Viewpoint: Estimating the equity premium. J Y Campbell, Canadian Journal of Economics. 411J. Y. Campbell, "Viewpoint: Estimating the equity premium, " Canadian Journal of Economics, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 1-21, 2008.

By Force of Habit: A Consumption Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior. J Y Campbell, J H Cochrane, Journal of Political Economy. 1072J. Y. Campbell and J. H. Cochrane, "By Force of Habit: A Consumption Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior, " Journal of Political Economy, vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 205- 251, 1999.

Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out of Sample: Can Anything Beat the Historical Average. J Y Campbell, S B Ompson, Review of Financial Studies. 214J. Y. Campbell and S. B. ompson, "Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out of Sample: Can Anything Beat the Historical Average?" e Review of Financial Studies, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1509-1531, 2008.

A Model of Income Distribution. D G Champernowne, e Economic Journal. 63250D. G. Champernowne, "A Model of Income Distribution, " e Economic Journal, vol. 63, no. 250, pp. 318-351, 1953.

Immiserizing deindustrialization: A dynamic trade model with credit constraints. T Chesnokova, Journal of International Economics. 732T. Chesnokova, "Immiserizing deindustrialization: A dynamic trade model with credit con- straints, " Journal of International Economics, vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 407 -420, 2007.

An Intertemporal General Equilibrium Model of Asset Prices. J C Cox, J E Ingersoll, S A Ross, Econometrica. 532J. C. Cox, J. E. Ingersoll, and S. A. Ross, "An Intertemporal General Equilibrium Model of Asset Prices, " Econometrica, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 363-384, 1985.

On Returns Di erentials. S E Curcuru, C P , F E Warnock, National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper 18866S. E. Curcuru, C. P. omas, and F. E. Warnock, "On Returns Di erentials, " National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 18866, March 2013.

e Volatility of International Capital Flows and Foreign Assets. W W Dou, A Verdelhan, Tech. Rep. W. W. Dou and A. Verdelhan, " e Volatility of International Capital Flows and Foreign Assets, " Tech. Rep., 2015.

Exorbitant Privilege: e Rise and Fall of the Dollar and the Future of the International Monetary System. B Eichengreen, Oxford University Press1st edB. Eichengreen, Exorbitant Privilege: e Rise and Fall of the Dollar and the Future of the International Monetary System, 1st ed. Oxford University Press, 2011.

Heterogeneity and Persistence in Returns to Wealth. A Fagereng, L Guiso, D Malacrino, L Pistaferri, IMF Working Papers. A. Fagereng, L. Guiso, D. Malacrino, and L. Pistaferri, "Heterogeneity and Persistence in Returns to Wealth, " IMF Working Papers, 2018.

e Equity Premium. E F Fama, K R French, Journal of Finance. 572E. F. Fama and K. R. French, " e Equity Premium, " e Journal of Finance, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 637-659, 2002.

Financial Frictions and the Wealth Distribution. J Fernández-Villaverde, S Hurtado, G Nuno, J. Fernández-Villaverde, S. Hurtado, and G. Nuno, "Financial Frictions and the Wealth Dis- tribution, " 2018.

Capital Account Liberalization and Inequality. D Furceri, P Loungani, IMF Working Papers. D. Furceri and P. Loungani, "Capital Account Liberalization and Inequality, " IMF Working Papers, 2015.

e Aggregate and Distributional E ects of Financial Globalization: Evidence from Macro and Sectoral Data. D Furceri, P Loungani, J D Ostry, D. Furceri, P. Loungani, and J. D. Ostry, " e Aggregate and Distributional E ects of Finan- cial Globalization: Evidence from Macro and Sectoral Data, " 2017.

Power Laws in Economics and Finance. X Gabaix, Annual Review of Economics. 11X. Gabaix, "Power Laws in Economics and Finance, " Annual Review of Economics, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 255-294, 2009.

X Gabaix, J.-M Lasry, P.-L Lions, B Moll, Dynamics of Inequality. 84X. Gabaix, J.-M. Lasry, P.-L. Lions, and B. Moll, " e Dynamics of Inequality, " Econometrica, vol. 84, no. 6, pp. 2071-2111, 2016.

Asset Prices and Wealth Inequality. M Gomez, M. Gomez, "Asset Prices and Wealth Inequality, " 2019.

Displacement and the Rise in Top Wealth Inequality. --, "Displacement and the Rise in Top Wealth Inequality, " 2019.

From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege. P.-O Gourinchas, H Rey, University of Chicago PressP.-O. Gourinchas and H. Rey, From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege. e University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 11-15.

Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty. IMES Discussion Paper Series. --, "Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty, " IMES Discussion Paper Series, 2010.

Predictable Risk and Returns in Emerging Markets. C R Harvey, Review of Financial Studies. 83C. R. Harvey, "Predictable Risk and Returns in Emerging Markets, " e Review of Financial Studies, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 773-816, 1995.

E Helpman, Globalization and Inquality. Harvard University PressE. Helpman, Globalization and Inquality. Harvard University Press, 2018.

Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and e Real Sector. B Holmstrom, J Tirole, e arterly Journal of Economics. 1123B. Holmstrom and J. Tirole, "Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and e Real Sector, " e arterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112, no. 3, pp. 663-691, 1997.

A Comprehensive antitative eory of the US Wealth Distribution. J Hubmer, P Krusell, A A SmithJr, Working PaperJ. Hubmer, P. Krusell, and A. A. Smith Jr, "A Comprehensive antitative eory of the US Wealth Distribution, " Working Paper, 2018.

e Risk-free Rate in Heterogeneous-agent Incomplete-insurance Economies. M Hugge, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control. 175M. Hugge , " e Risk-free Rate in Heterogeneous-agent Incomplete-insurance Economies, " Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 953-969, 1993.

Changes in the Distribution of Income Among Tax Filers Between. T L Hungerford, CRS Report for Congres. Role of Labor Income, Capital Income, and Tax PolicyT. L. Hungerford, "Changes in the Distribution of Income Among Tax Filers Between 1996 and 2006: e Role of Labor Income, Capital Income, and Tax Policy, " CRS Report for Con- gres, 2011.

Rising Income Inequality: Technology, or Trade and Financial Globalization?. F Jaumo E, S Lall, C Papageorgiou, no. 08/185IMF Working Papers. F. Jaumo e, S. Lall, and C. Papageorgiou, "Rising Income Inequality: Technology, or Trade and Financial Globalization?" IMF Working Papers, no. 08/185, 2008.

Pareto and Pike y: e Macroeconomics of Top Income and Wealth Inequality. C I Jones, Journal of Economic Perspectives. 291C. I. Jones, "Pareto and Pike y: e Macroeconomics of Top Income and Wealth Inequality, " Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 29-46, February 2015.

. O Jordà, K Knoll, D Kuvshinov, M Schularick, A M Taylor, National Bureau of Economic Research. Rate of Return on Everything. Working Paper 24112O. Jordà, K. Knoll, D. Kuvshinov, M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor, " e Rate of Return on Everything, 1870-2015, " National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 24112, De- cember 2017.

Investor Sophistication and Capital Income Inequality. M Kacperczyk, J Nosal, L Stevens, Journal of Monetary Economics. M. Kacperczyk, J. Nosal, and L. Stevens, "Investor Sophistication and Capital Income In- equality, " Journal of Monetary Economics, 2018.

Monetary Policy According to HANK. G Kaplan, B Moll, G L Violante, American Economic Review. 1083G. Kaplan, B. Moll, and G. L. Violante, "Monetary Policy According to HANK, " American Economic Review, vol. 108, no. 3, pp. 697-743, March 2018.

Balance-of-Payments De cits and the International Market for Liquidity. C P Kindleberger, Essays in International Finance. 10646C. P. Kindleberger, "Balance-of-Payments De cits and the International Market for Liquid- ity, " Essays in International Finance, vol. 106, no. 46, 1965.

Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy. P Krusell, A A Smith, Journal of Political Economy. 1065P. Krusell and A. A. Smith, "Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy, " Jour- nal of Political Economy, vol. 106, no. 5, pp. 867-896, 1998.

Financial Globalisation and the Crisis. P R Lane, Open Economic Review. 243P. R. Lane, "Financial Globalisation and the Crisis, " Open Economic Review, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 555-580, 2013.

e External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities. P R Lane, G M Milesi-Ferre I, Journal of International Economics. 732P. R. Lane and G. M. Milesi-Ferre i, " e External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004, " Journal of International Economics, vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 223-250, 2007.

e Strong Case for the Generalized Logarithmic Utility Model as the Premier Model of Financial Markets. R Litzenberger, M Rubinstein, Journal of Finance. 312R. Litzenberger and M. Rubinstein, " e Strong Case for the Generalized Logarithmic Utility Model as the Premier Model of Financial Markets, " e Journal of Finance, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 551-571, 1976.

Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and Reserve Currencies. M Maggiori, American Economic Review. 10710M. Maggiori, "Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and Reserve Curren- cies, " American Economic Review, vol. 107, no. 10, pp. 3038-71, October 2017.

Yes, r>g. So What?. N G Mankiw, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings. 1055N. G. Mankiw, "Yes, r>g. So What?" American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, vol. 105, no. 5, pp. 43-47, 2015.

Financial Integration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances. E G Mendoza, V , J.-V Rios-Rull, Journal of Political Economy. 1173E. G. Mendoza, V. adrini, and J.-V. Rios-Rull, "Financial Integration, Financial Develop- ment, and Global Imbalances, " Journal of Political Economy, vol. 117, no. 3, pp. 371-416, 2009.

Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: e Continuous-Time Case. R C Merton, Review of Economics and Statistics. 513R. C. Merton, "Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: e Continuous-Time Case, " e Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 247-257, 1969.

Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous-time Model. Journal of Economic eory. 34--, "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous-time Model, " Journal of Economic eory, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 373-413, 1971.

Continuous-Time Finance. Wiley-Blackwell--, Continuous-Time Finance. Wiley-Blackwell, 1992.

Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump. A Mian, K Rao, A Su, e arterly Journal of Economics. 1284A. Mian, K. Rao, and A. Su , "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump, " e arterly Journal of Economics, vol. 128, no. 4, pp. 1687-1726, 2013.

Risk-Taking, Global Diversi cation, and Growth. M Obstfeld, e American Economic Review. 845M. Obstfeld, "Risk-Taking, Global Diversi cation, and Growth, " e American Economic Re- view, vol. 84, no. 5, pp. 1310-1329, 1994.

Decreasing Relative Risk Aversion and Tests of Risk Sharing. M Ogaki, Q Zhang, Econometrica. 692M. Ogaki and Q. Zhang, "Decreasing Relative Risk Aversion and Tests of Risk Sharing, " Econometrica, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 515-526, 2001.

T Pike, Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard University PressT. Pike y, Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard University Press, 2014.

Distributional National Accounts: Methods and Estimates for the United States. T Pike Y, E Saez, G Zucman, e arterly Journal of Economics. 1332T. Pike y, E. Saez, and G. Zucman, "Distributional National Accounts: Methods and Esti- mates for the United States, " e arterly Journal of Economics, vol. 133, no. 2, pp. 553-609, 2018.

Entrepreneurship, Saving, and Social Mobility. V , Review of Economic Dynamics. 31V. adrini, "Entrepreneurship, Saving, and Social Mobility, " Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-40, 2000.

A Note on Pike y and Diminishing Returns. M Rognlie, M. Rognlie, "A Note on Pike y and Diminishing Returns, " 2014.

Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data. E Saez, G Zucman, e arterly Journal of Economics. 1312519E. Saez and G. Zucman, "Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data, " e arterly Journal of Economics, vol. 131, no. 2, p. 519, 2016.

Capital Asset Prices: A eory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of Risk. W F Sharpe, Journal of Finance. 193W. F. Sharpe, "Capital Asset Prices: A eory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of Risk , " e Journal of Finance, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 425-442, 1964.

Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation. J C Stein, e arterly Journal of Economics. 1271J. C. Stein, "Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation, " e arterly Journal of Eco- nomics, vol. 127, no. 1, pp. 57-95, 2012.

Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound. L H Summers, Business Economics. 492U.S.L. H. Summers, "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound, " Business Economics, vol. 49, no. 2, 2014.
